CHAPTER I.

A MYSTERIOUS DISAPPEARANCE.



There are some fields near Manchester, well known to the inhabitants
as "Green Heys Fields," through which runs a public footpath to a
little village about two miles distant. In spite of these fields
being flat and low, nay, in spite of the want of wood (the great and
usual recommendation of level tracts of land), there is a charm about
them which strikes even the inhabitant of a mountainous district,
who sees and feels the effect of contrast in these common-place but
thoroughly rural fields, with the busy, bustling manufacturing town
he left but half-an-hour ago. Here and there an old black and white
farm-house, with its rambling outbuildings, speaks of other times and
other occupations than those which now absorb the population of the
neighbourhood. Here in their seasons may be seen the country business
of hay-making, ploughing, &c., which are such pleasant mysteries
for townspeople to watch; and here the artisan, deafened with noise
of tongues and engines, may come to listen awhile to the delicious
sounds of rural life: the lowing of cattle, the milk-maids' call,
the clatter and cackle of poultry in the old farm-yards. You cannot
wonder, then, that these fields are popular places of resort at
every holiday time; and you would not wonder, if you could see, or I
properly describe, the charm of one particular stile, that it should
be, on such occasions, a crowded halting-place. Close by it is a
deep, clear pond, reflecting in its dark green depths the shadowy
trees that bend over it to exclude the sun. The only place where
its banks are shelving is on the side next to a rambling farm-yard,
belonging to one of those old-world, gabled, black and white houses
I named above, overlooking the field through which the public
footpath leads. The porch of this farm-house is covered by a
rose-tree; and the little garden surrounding it is crowded with a
medley of old-fashioned herbs and flowers, planted long ago, when the
garden was the only druggist's shop within reach, and allowed to grow
in scrambling and wild luxuriance--roses, lavender, sage, balm (for
tea), rosemary, pinks and wallflowers, onions and jessamine, in most
republican and indiscriminate order. This farm-house and garden are
within a hundred yards of the stile of which I spoke, leading from
the large pasture field into a smaller one, divided by a hedge of
hawthorn and black-thorn; and near this stile, on the further side,
there runs a tale that primroses may often be found, and occasionally
the blue sweet violet on the grassy hedge bank.

I do not know whether it was on a holiday granted by the masters, or
a holiday seized in right of Nature and her beautiful spring time by
the workmen, but one afternoon (now ten or a dozen years ago) these
fields were much thronged. It was an early May evening--the April
of the poets; for heavy showers had fallen all the morning, and
the round, soft, white clouds which were blown by a west wind over
the dark blue sky, were sometimes varied by one blacker and more
threatening. The softness of the day tempted forth the young green
leaves, which almost visibly fluttered into life; and the willows,
which that morning had had only a brown reflection in the water
below, were now of that tender gray-green which blends so delicately
with the spring harmony of colours.

Groups of merry and somewhat loud-talking girls, whose ages might
range from twelve to twenty, came by with a buoyant step. They were
most of them factory girls, and wore the usual out-of-doors dress of
that particular class of maidens; namely, a shawl, which at mid-day
or in fine weather was allowed to be merely a shawl, but towards
evening, or if the day were chilly, became a sort of Spanish mantilla
or Scotch plaid, and was brought over the head and hung loosely down,
or was pinned under the chin in no unpicturesque fashion.

Their faces were not remarkable for beauty; indeed, they were below
the average, with one or two exceptions; they had dark hair, neatly
and classically arranged, dark eyes, but sallow complexions and
irregular features. The only thing to strike a passer-by was an
acuteness and intelligence of countenance, which has often been
noticed in a manufacturing population.

There were also numbers of boys, or rather young men, rambling among
these fields, ready to bandy jokes with any one, and particularly
ready to enter into conversation with the girls, who, however, held
themselves aloof, not in a shy, but rather in an independent way,
assuming an indifferent manner to the noisy wit or obstreperous
compliments of the lads. Here and there came a sober quiet couple,
either whispering lovers, or husband and wife, as the case might
be; and if the latter, they were seldom unencumbered by an infant,
carried for the most part by the father, while occasionally even
three or four little toddlers had been carried or dragged thus
far, in order that the whole family might enjoy the delicious May
afternoon together.

Sometime in the course of that afternoon, two working men met with
friendly greeting at the stile so often named. One was a thorough
specimen of a Manchester man; born of factory workers, and himself
bred up in youth, and living in manhood, among the mills. He was
below the middle size and slightly made; there was almost a stunted
look about him; and his wan, colourless face gave you the idea, that
in his childhood he had suffered from the scanty living consequent
upon bad times and improvident habits. His features were strongly
marked, though not irregular, and their expression was extreme
earnestness; resolute either for good or evil; a sort of latent,
stern enthusiasm. At the time of which I write, the good predominated
over the bad in the countenance, and he was one from whom a stranger
would have asked a favour with tolerable faith that it would
be granted. He was accompanied by his wife, who might, without
exaggeration, have been called a lovely woman, although now her face
was swollen with crying, and often hidden behind her apron. She
had the fresh beauty of the agricultural districts; and somewhat
of the deficiency of sense in her countenance, which is likewise
characteristic of the rural inhabitants in comparison with the
natives of the manufacturing towns. She was far advanced in
pregnancy, which perhaps occasioned the overpowering and hysterical
nature of her grief. The friend whom they met was more handsome and
less sensible-looking than the man I have just described; he seemed
hearty and hopeful, and although his age was greater, yet there was
far more of youth's buoyancy in his appearance. He was tenderly
carrying a baby in arms, while his wife, a delicate, fragile-looking
woman, limping in her gait, bore another of the same age; little,
feeble twins, inheriting the frail appearance of their mother.

The last-mentioned man was the first to speak, while a sudden look
of sympathy dimmed his gladsome face. "Well, John, how goes it with
you?" and, in a lower voice, he added, "Any news of Esther, yet?"
Meanwhile the wives greeted each other like old friends, the soft and
plaintive voice of the mother of the twins seeming to call forth only
fresh sobs from Mrs. Barton.

"Come, women," said John Barton, "you've both walked far enough. My
Mary expects to have her bed in three weeks; and as for you, Mrs.
Wilson, you know you're but a cranky sort of a body at the best of
times." This was said so kindly, that no offence could be taken. "Sit
you down here; the grass is well nigh dry by this time; and you're
neither of you nesh [1] folk about taking cold. Stay," he added, with
some tenderness, "here's my pocket-handkerchief to spread under
you, to save the gowns women always think so much of; and now, Mrs.
Wilson, give me the baby, I may as well carry him, while you talk and
comfort my wife; poor thing, she takes on sadly about Esther."

   [Footnote 1: "Nesh;" Anglo-Saxon, nesc, tender.]

These arrangements were soon completed: the two women sat down on the
blue cotton handkerchiefs of their husbands, and the latter, each
carrying a baby, set off for a further walk; but as soon as Barton
had turned his back upon his wife, his countenance fell back into an
expression of gloom.

"Then you've heard nothing of Esther, poor lass?" asked Wilson.

"No, nor shan't, as I take it. My mind is, she's gone off with
somebody. My wife frets, and thinks she's drowned herself, but
I tell her, folks don't care to put on their best clothes to drown
themselves; and Mrs. Bradshaw (where she lodged, you know) says the
last time she set eyes on her was last Tuesday, when she came down
stairs, dressed in her Sunday gown, and with a new ribbon in her
bonnet, and gloves on her hands, like the lady she was so fond of
thinking herself."

"She was as pretty a creature as ever the sun shone on."

"Ay, she was a farrantly [2] lass; more's the pity now," added Barton,
with a sigh. "You see them Buckinghamshire people as comes to work
in Manchester, has quite a different look with them to us Manchester
folk. You'll not see among the Manchester wenches such fresh rosy
cheeks, or such black lashes to gray eyes (making them look like
black), as my wife and Esther had. I never seed two such pretty women
for sisters; never. Not but what beauty is a sad snare. Here was
Esther so puffed up, that there was no holding her in. Her spirit was
always up, if I spoke ever so little in the way of advice to her; my
wife spoiled her, it is true, for you see she was so much older than
Esther she was more like a mother to her, doing every thing for her."


   [Footnote 2: "Farrantly," comely, pleasant-looking.]


"I wonder she ever left you," observed his friend.

"That's the worst of factory work, for girls. They can earn so much
when work is plenty, that they can maintain themselves any how. My
Mary shall never work in a factory, that I'm determined on. You see
Esther spent her money in dress, thinking to set off her pretty face;
and got to come home so late at night, that at last I told her my
mind: my missis thinks I spoke crossly, but I meant right, for I
loved Esther, if it was only for Mary's sake. Says I, 'Esther, I see
what you'll end at with your artificials, and your fly-away veils,
and stopping out when honest women are in their beds; you'll be a
street-walker, Esther, and then, don't you go to think I'll have you
darken my door, though my wife is your sister.' So says she, 'Don't
trouble yourself, John. I'll pack up and be off now, for I'll never
stay to hear myself called as you call me.' She flushed up like a
turkey-cock, and I thought fire would come out of her eyes; but when
she saw Mary cry (for Mary can't abide words in a house), she went
and kissed her, and said she was not so bad as I thought her. So we
talked more friendly, for, as I said, I liked the lass well enough,
and her pretty looks, and her cheery ways. But she said (and at the
time I thought there was sense in what she said) we should be much
better friends if she went into lodgings, and only came to see us now
and then."

"Then you still were friendly. Folks said you'd cast her off, and
said you'd never speak to her again."

"Folks always make one a deal worse than one is," said John Barton,
testily. "She came many a time to our house after she left off living
with us. Last Sunday se'nnight--no! it was this very last Sunday, she
came to drink a cup of tea with Mary; and that was the last time we
set eyes on her."

"Was she any ways different in her manner?" asked Wilson.

"Well, I don't know. I have thought several times since, that she was
a bit quieter, and more womanly-like; more gentle, and more blushing,
and not so riotous and noisy. She comes in, toward four o'clock,
when afternoon church was loosing, and she goes and hangs her bonnet
up on the old nail we used to call hers, while she lived with us. I
remember thinking what a pretty lass she was, as she sat on a low
stool by Mary, who was rocking herself, and in rather a poor way.
She laughed and cried by turns, but all so softly and gently, like
a child, that I couldn't find in my heart to scold her, especially
as Mary was fretting already. One thing I do remember I did say, and
pretty sharply too. She took our little Mary by the waist, and--"

"Thou must leave off calling her 'little' Mary, she's growing up into
as fine a lass as one can see on a summer's day; more of her mother's
stock than thine," interrupted Wilson.

"Well, well, I call her 'little,' because her mother's name is Mary.
But, as I was saying, she takes Mary in a coaxing sort of way, and,
'Mary,' says she, 'what should you think if I sent for you some day
and made a lady of you?' So I could not stand such talk as that to my
girl, and I said, 'Thou'd best not put that nonsense i' the girl's
head I can tell thee; I'd rather see her earning her bread by the
sweat of her brow, as the Bible tells her she should do, ay, though
she never got butter to her bread, than be like a do-nothing lady,
worrying shopmen all morning, and screeching at her pianny all
afternoon, and going to bed without having done a good turn to any
one of God's creatures but herself.'"

"Thou never could abide the gentlefolk," said Wilson, half amused at
his friend's vehemence.

"And what good have they ever done me that I should like them?" asked
Barton, the latent fire lighting up his eye: and bursting forth, he
continued, "If I am sick, do they come and nurse me? If my child lies
dying (as poor Tom lay, with his white wan lips quivering, for want
of better food than I could give him), does the rich man bring the
wine or broth that might save his life? If I am out of work for weeks
in the bad times, and winter comes, with black frost, and keen east
wind, and there is no coal for the grate, and no clothes for the bed,
and the thin bones are seen through the ragged clothes, does the rich
man share his plenty with me, as he ought to do, if his religion
wasn't a humbug? When I lie on my death-bed, and Mary (bless her)
stands fretting, as I know she will fret," and here his voice
faltered a little, "will a rich lady come and take her to her own
home if need be, till she can look round, and see what best to do?
No, I tell you, it's the poor, and the poor only, as does such things
for the poor. Don't think to come over me with th' old tale, that the
rich know nothing of the trials of the poor. I say, if they don't
know, they ought to know. We're their slaves as long as we can work;
we pile up their fortunes with the sweat of our brows; and yet we are
to live as separate as if we were in two worlds; ay, as separate as
Dives and Lazarus, with a great gulf betwixt us: but I know who was
best off then," and he wound up his speech with a low chuckle that
had no mirth in it.

"Well, neighbour," said Wilson, "all that may be very true, but what
I want to know now is about Esther--when did you last hear of her?"

"Why, she took leave of us that Sunday night in a very loving way,
kissing both wife Mary, and daughter Mary (if I must not call her
little), and shaking hands with me; but all in a cheerful sort of
manner, so we thought nothing about her kisses and shakes. But on
Wednesday night comes Mrs. Bradshaw's son with Esther's box, and
presently Mrs. Bradshaw follows with the key; and when we began to
talk, we found Esther told her she was coming back to live with us,
and would pay her week's money for not giving notice; and on Tuesday
night she carried off a little bundle (her best clothes were on her
back, as I said before), and told Mrs. Bradshaw not to hurry herself
about the big box, but bring it when she had time. So of course she
thought she should find Esther with us; and when she told her story,
my missis set up such a screech, and fell down in a dead swoon. Mary
ran up with water for her mother, and I thought so much about my
wife, I did not seem to care at all for Esther. But the next day I
asked all the neighbours (both our own and Bradshaw's), and they'd
none of 'em heard or seen nothing of her. I even went to a policeman,
a good enough sort of man, but a fellow I'd never spoke to before
because of his livery, and I asks him if his 'cuteness could find any
thing out for us. So I believe he asks other policemen; and one on
'em had seen a wench, like our Esther, walking very quickly, with a
bundle under her arm, on Tuesday night, toward eight o'clock, and
get into a hackney coach, near Hulme Church, and we don't know th'
number, and can't trace it no further. I'm sorry enough for the girl,
for bad's come over her, one way or another, but I'm sorrier for my
wife. She loved her next to me and Mary, and she's never been the
same body since poor Tom's death. However, let's go back to them;
your old woman may have done her good."

As they walked homewards with a brisker pace, Wilson expressed a wish
that they still were the near neighbours they once had been.

"Still our Alice lives in the cellar under No. 14, in Barber Street,
and if you'd only speak the word she'd be with you in five minutes,
to keep your wife company when she's lonesome. Though I'm Alice's
brother, and perhaps ought not to say it, I will say there's none
more ready to help with heart or hand than she is. Though she may
have done a hard day's wash, there's not a child ill within the
street but Alice goes to offer to sit up, and does sit up too, though
may be she's to be at her work by six next morning."

"She's a poor woman, and can feel for the poor, Wilson," was Barton's
reply; and then he added, "Thank you kindly for your offer, and
mayhap I may trouble her to be a bit with my wife, for while I'm
at work, and Mary's at school, I know she frets above a bit. See,
there's Mary!" and the father's eye brightened, as in the distance,
among a group of girls, he spied his only daughter, a bonny lassie
of thirteen or so, who came bounding along to meet and to greet her
father, in a manner which showed that the stern-looking man had a
tender nature within. The two men had crossed the last stile while
Mary loitered behind to gather some buds of the coming hawthorn, when
an over-grown lad came past her, and snatched a kiss, exclaiming,
"For old acquaintance sake, Mary."

"Take that for old acquaintance sake, then," said the girl, blushing
rosy red, more with anger than shame, as she slapped his face. The
tones of her voice called back her father and his friend, and the
aggressor proved to be the eldest son of the latter, the senior by
eighteen years of his little brothers.

"Here, children, instead o' kissing and quarrelling, do ye each take
a baby, for if Wilson's arms be like mine they are heartily tired."

Mary sprang forward to take her father's charge, with a girl's
fondness for infants, and with some little foresight of the event
soon to happen at home; while young Wilson seemed to lose his rough,
cubbish nature as he crowed and cooed to his little brother.

"Twins is a great trial to a poor man, bless 'em," said the
half-proud, half-weary father, as he bestowed a smacking kiss on the
babe ere he parted with it.




CHAPTER II.

A MANCHESTER TEA-PARTY.


   Polly, put the kettle on,
     And let's have tea!
   Polly, put the kettle on,
     And we'll all have tea.


"Here we are, wife; didst thou think thou'd lost us?" quoth
hearty-voiced Wilson, as the two women rose and shook themselves
in preparation for their homeward walk. Mrs. Barton was evidently
soothed, if not cheered, by the unburdening of her fears and thoughts
to her friend; and her approving look went far to second her
husband's invitation that the whole party should adjourn from Green
Heys Fields to tea, at the Bartons' house. The only faint opposition
was raised by Mrs. Wilson, on account of the lateness of the hour at
which they would probably return, which she feared on her babies'
account.

"Now, hold your tongue, missis, will you," said her husband,
good-temperedly. "Don't you know them brats never goes to sleep till
long past ten? and haven't you a shawl, under which you can tuck one
lad's head, as safe as a bird's under its wing? And as for t'other
one, I'll put it in my pocket rather than not stay, now we are this
far away from Ancoats."

"Or I can lend you another shawl," suggested Mrs. Barton.

"Ay, any thing rather than not stay."

The matter being decided, the party proceeded home, through many
half-finished streets, all so like one another that you might have
easily been bewildered and lost your way. Not a step, however, did
our friends lose; down this entry, cutting off that corner, until
they turned out of one of these innumerable streets into a little
paved court, having the backs of houses at the end opposite to
the opening, and a gutter running through the middle to carry off
household slops, washing suds, &c. The women who lived in the court
were busy taking in strings of caps, frocks, and various articles of
linen, which hung from side to side, dangling so low, that if our
friends had been a few minutes sooner, they would have had to stoop
very much, or else the half-wet clothes would have flapped in their
faces; but although the evening seemed yet early when they were in
the open fields--among the pent-up houses, night, with its mists, and
its darkness, had already begun to fall.

Many greetings were given and exchanged between the Wilsons and these
women, for not long ago they had also dwelt in this court.

Two rude lads, standing at a disorderly looking house-door,
exclaimed, as Mary Barton (the daughter) passed, "Eh, look! Polly
Barton's gotten a sweetheart."

Of course this referred to young Wilson, who stole a look to see how
Mary took the idea. He saw her assume the air of a young fury, and to
his next speech she answered not a word.

Mrs. Barton produced the key of the door from her pocket; and on
entering the house-place it seemed as if they were in total darkness,
except one bright spot, which might be a cat's eye, or might be, what
it was, a red-hot fire, smouldering under a large piece of coal,
which John Barton immediately applied himself to break up, and the
effect instantly produced was warm and glowing light in every corner
of the room. To add to this (although the coarse yellow glare seemed
lost in the ruddy glow from the fire), Mrs. Barton lighted a dip by
sticking it in the fire, and having placed it satisfactorily in a
tin candlestick, began to look further about her, on hospitable
thoughts intent. The room was tolerably large, and possessed many
conveniences. On the right of the door, as you entered, was a longish
window, with a broad ledge. On each side of this, hung blue-and-white
check curtains, which were now drawn, to shut in the friends met to
enjoy themselves. Two geraniums, unpruned and leafy, which stood
on the sill, formed a further defence from out-door pryers. In
the corner between the window and the fire-side was a cupboard,
apparently full of plates and dishes, cups and saucers, and some
more nondescript articles, for which one would have fancied their
possessors could find no use--such as triangular pieces of glass to
save carving knives and forks from dirtying table-cloths. However,
it was evident Mrs. Barton was proud of her crockery and glass, for
she left her cupboard door open, with a glance round of satisfaction
and pleasure. On the opposite side to the door and window was the
staircase, and two doors; one of which (the nearest to the fire)
led into a sort of little back kitchen, where dirty work, such
as washing up dishes, might be done, and whose shelves served as
larder, and pantry, and storeroom, and all. The other door, which
was considerably lower, opened into the coal-hole--the slanting
closet under the stairs; from which, to the fire-place, there was a
gay-coloured piece of oil-cloth laid. The place seemed almost crammed
with furniture (sure sign of good times among the mills). Beneath the
window was a dresser with three deep drawers. Opposite the fire-place
was a table, which I should call a Pembroke, only that it was made
of deal, and I cannot tell how far such a name may be applied to
such humble material. On it, resting against the wall, was a bright
green japanned tea-tray, having a couple of scarlet lovers embracing
in the middle. The fire-light danced merrily on this, and really
(setting all taste but that of a child's aside) it gave a richness
of colouring to that side of the room. It was in some measure propped
up by a crimson tea-caddy, also of japan ware. A round table on one
branching leg really for use, stood in the corresponding corner to
the cupboard; and, if you can picture all this with a washy, but
clean stencilled pattern on the walls, you can form some idea of John
Barton's home.

The tray was soon hoisted down, and before the merry chatter of
cups and saucers began, the women disburdened themselves of their
out-of-door things, and sent Mary up stairs with them. Then came a
long whispering, and chinking of money, to which Mr. and Mrs. Wilson
were too polite to attend; knowing, as they did full well, that it
all related to the preparations for hospitality; hospitality that,
in their turn, they should have such pleasure in offering. So they
tried to be busily occupied with the children, and not to hear Mrs.
Barton's directions to Mary.

"Run, Mary dear, just round the corner, and get some fresh eggs at
Tipping's (you may get one a-piece, that will be five-pence), and see
if he has any nice ham cut, that he would let us have a pound of."

"Say two pounds, missis, and don't be stingy," chimed in the husband.

"Well, a pound and a half, Mary. And get it Cumberland ham, for
Wilson comes from there-away, and it will have a sort of relish of
home with it he'll like,--and Mary" (seeing the lassie fain to be
off), "you must get a pennyworth of milk and a loaf of bread--mind
you get it fresh and new--and, and--that's all, Mary."

"No, it's not all," said her husband. "Thou must get sixpennyworth of
rum, to warm the tea; thou'll get it at the 'Grapes.' And thou just
go to Alice Wilson; he says she lives just right round the corner,
under 14, Barber Street" (this was addressed to his wife), "and tell
her to come and take her tea with us; she'll like to see her brother,
I'll be bound, let alone Jane and the twins."

"If she comes she must bring a tea-cup and saucer, for we have but
half-a-dozen, and here's six of us," said Mrs. Barton.

"Pooh! pooh! Jem and Mary can drink out of one, surely."

But Mary secretly determined to take care that Alice brought her
tea-cup and saucer, if the alternative was to be her sharing any
thing with Jem.

Alice Wilson had but just come in. She had been out all day in
the fields, gathering wild herbs for drinks and medicine, for in
addition to her invaluable qualities as a sick nurse and her worldly
occupation as a washerwoman, she added a considerable knowledge of
hedge and field simples; and on fine days, when no more profitable
occupation offered itself, she used to ramble off into the lanes and
meadows as far as her legs could carry her. This evening she had
returned loaded with nettles, and her first object was to light a
candle and see to hang them up in bunches in every available place in
her cellar room. It was the perfection of cleanliness: in one corner
stood the modest-looking bed, with a check curtain at the head, the
whitewashed wall filling up the place where the corresponding one
should have been. The floor was bricked, and scrupulously clean,
although so damp that it seemed as if the last washing would never
dry up. As the cellar window looked into an area in the street,
down which boys might throw stones, it was protected by an outside
shelter, and was oddly festooned with all manner of hedge-row, ditch,
and field plants, which we are accustomed to call valueless, but
which have a powerful effect either for good or for evil, and are
consequently much used among the poor. The room was strewed, hung,
and darkened with these bunches, which emitted no very fragrant odour
in their process of drying. In one corner was a sort of broad hanging
shelf, made of old planks, where some old hoards of Alice's were
kept. Her little bit of crockery ware was ranged on the mantelpiece,
where also stood her candlestick and box of matches. A small cupboard
contained at the bottom coals, and at the top her bread and basin of
oatmeal, her frying pan, tea-pot, and a small tin saucepan, which
served as a kettle, as well as for cooking the delicate little messes
of broth which Alice sometimes was able to manufacture for a sick
neighbour.

After her walk she felt chilly and weary, and was busy trying to
light her fire with the damp coals, and half green sticks, when Mary
knocked.

"Come in," said Alice, remembering, however, that she had barred the
door for the night, and hastening to make it possible for any one to
come in.

"Is that you, Mary Barton?" exclaimed she, as the light from her
candle streamed on the girl's face. "How you are grown since I used
to see you at my brother's! Come in, lass, come in."

"Please," said Mary, almost breathless, "mother says you're to come
to tea, and bring your cup and saucer, for George and Jane Wilson is
with us, and the twins, and Jem. And you're to make haste, please."

"I'm sure it's very neighbourly and kind in your mother, and I'll
come, with many thanks. Stay, Mary, has your mother got any nettles
for spring drink? If she hasn't I'll take her some."

"No, I don't think she has."

Mary ran off like a hare to fulfil what, to a girl of thirteen,
fond of power, was the more interesting part of her errand--the
money-spending part. And well and ably did she perform her business,
returning home with a little bottle of rum, and the eggs in one
hand, while her other was filled with some excellent red-and-white
smoke-flavoured Cumberland ham, wrapped up in paper.

She was at home, and frying ham, before Alice had chosen her nettles,
put out her candle, locked her door, and walked in a very foot-sore
manner as far as John Barton's. What an aspect of comfort did his
houseplace present, after her humble cellar. She did not think of
comparing; but for all that she felt the delicious glow of the fire,
the bright light that revelled in every corner of the room, the
savoury smells, the comfortable sounds of a boiling kettle, and the
hissing, frizzling ham. With a little old-fashioned curtsey she shut
the door, and replied with a loving heart to the boisterous and
surprised greeting of her brother.

And now all preparations being made, the party sat down; Mrs. Wilson
in the post of honour, the rocking chair on the right hand side
of the fire, nursing her baby, while its father, in an opposite
arm-chair, tried vainly to quieten the other with bread soaked in
milk.

Mrs. Barton knew manners too well to do any thing but sit at the
tea-table and make tea, though in her heart she longed to be able
to superintend the frying of the ham, and cast many an anxious
look at Mary as she broke the eggs and turned the ham, with a very
comfortable portion of confidence in her own culinary powers. Jem
stood awkwardly leaning against the dresser, replying rather gruffly
to his aunt's speeches, which gave him, he thought, the air of being
a little boy; whereas he considered himself as a young man, and not
so very young neither, as in two months he would be eighteen. Barton
vibrated between the fire and the tea-table, his only drawback
being a fancy that every now and then his wife's face flushed and
contracted as if in pain.

At length the business actually began. Knives and forks, cups and
saucers made a noise, but human voices were still, for human beings
were hungry, and had no time to speak. Alice first broke silence;
holding her tea-cup with the manner of one proposing a toast, she
said, "Here's to absent friends. Friends may meet, but mountains
never."

It was an unlucky toast or sentiment, as she instantly felt. Every
one thought of Esther, the absent Esther; and Mrs. Barton put down
her food, and could not hide the fast dropping tears. Alice could
have bitten her tongue out.

It was a wet blanket to the evening; for though all had been said
and suggested in the fields that could be said or suggested, every
one had a wish to say something in the way of comfort to poor Mrs.
Barton, and a dislike to talk about any thing else while her tears
fell fast and scalding. So George Wilson, his wife and children, set
off early home, not before (in spite of _mal-à-propos_ speeches) they
had expressed a wish that such meetings might often take place, and
not before John Barton had given his hearty consent; and declared
that as soon as ever his wife was well again they would have just
such another evening.

"I will take care not to come and spoil it," thought poor Alice; and
going up to Mrs. Barton she took her hand almost humbly, and said,
"You don't know how sorry I am I said it."

To her surprise, a surprise that brought tears of joy into her
eyes, Mary Barton put her arms round her neck, and kissed the
self-reproaching Alice. "You didn't mean any harm, and it was me as
was so foolish; only this work about Esther, and not knowing where
she is, lies so heavy on my heart. Good night, and never think no
more about it. God bless you, Alice."

Many and many a time, as Alice reviewed that evening in her after
life, did she bless Mary Barton for these kind and thoughtful words.
But just then all she could say was, "Good night, Mary, and may God
bless _you_."




CHAPTER III.

JOHN BARTON'S GREAT TROUBLE.


   But when the morn came dim and sad,
     And chill with early showers,
   Her quiet eyelids closed--she had
     Another morn than ours!

   HOOD.


In the middle of that same night a neighbour of the Bartons was
roused from her sound, well-earned sleep, by a knocking, which had at
first made part of her dream; but starting up, as soon as she became
convinced of its reality, she opened the window, and asked who was
there?

"Me, John Barton," answered he, in a voice tremulous with agitation.
"My missis is in labour, and, for the love of God, step in while I
run for th' doctor, for she's fearful bad."

While the woman hastily dressed herself, leaving the window still
open, she heard cries of agony, which resounded in the little court
in the stillness of the night. In less than five minutes she was
standing by Mrs. Barton's bed-side, relieving the terrified Mary, who
went about, where she was told, like an automaton; her eyes tearless,
her face calm, though deadly pale, and uttering no sound, except when
her teeth chattered for very nervousness.

The cries grew worse.

The doctor was very long in hearing the repeated rings at his
night-bell, and still longer in understanding who it was that made
this sudden call upon his services; and then he begged Barton just
to wait while he dressed himself, in order that no time might be
lost in finding the court and house. Barton absolutely stamped with
impatience, outside the doctor's door, before he came down; and
walked so fast homewards, that the medical man several times asked
him to go slower.

"Is she so very bad?" asked he.

"Worse, much worser than ever I saw her before," replied John.

No! she was not--she was at peace. The cries were still for ever.
John had no time for listening. He opened the latched door, stayed
not to light a candle for the mere ceremony of showing his companion
up the stairs, so well known to himself; but, in two minutes was
in the room, where lay the dead wife, whom he had loved with all
the power of his strong heart. The doctor stumbled up stairs by the
fire-light, and met the awe-struck look of the neighbour, which at
once told him the state of things. The room was still, as he, with
habitual tip-toe step, approached the poor frail body, whom nothing
now could more disturb. Her daughter knelt by the bed-side, her face
buried in the clothes, which were almost crammed into her mouth, to
keep down the choking sobs. The husband stood like one stupified. The
doctor questioned the neighbour in whispers, and then approaching
Barton, said, "You must go down stairs. This is a great shock, but
bear it like a man. Go down."

He went mechanically and sat down on the first chair. He had no hope.
The look of death was too clear upon her face. Still, when he heard
one or two unusual noises, the thought burst on him that it might
only be a trance, a fit, a--he did not well know what,--but not
death! Oh, not death! And he was starting up to go up stairs again,
when the doctor's heavy cautious creaking footstep was heard on the
stairs. Then he knew what it really was in the chamber above.

"Nothing could have saved her--there has been some shock to the
system--" and so he went on; but, to unheeding ears, which yet
retained his words to ponder on; words not for immediate use in
conveying sense, but to be laid by, in the store-house of memory, for
a more convenient season. The doctor seeing the state of the case,
grieved for the man; and, very sleepy, thought it best to go, and
accordingly wished him good-night--but there was no answer, so he let
himself out; and Barton sat on, like a stock or a stone, so rigid,
so still. He heard the sounds above too, and knew what they meant.
He heard the stiff, unseasoned drawer, in which his wife kept her
clothes, pulled open. He saw the neighbour come down, and blunder
about in search of soap and water. He knew well what she wanted, and
_why_ she wanted them, but he did not speak, nor offer to help. At
last she went, with some kindly-meant words (a text of comfort, which
fell upon a deafened ear), and something about "Mary," but which
Mary, in his bewildered state, he could not tell.

He tried to realise it, to think it possible. And then his mind
wandered off to other days, to far different times. He thought of
their courtship; of his first seeing her, an awkward, beautiful
rustic, far too shiftless for the delicate factory work to which she
was apprenticed; of his first gift to her, a bead necklace, which had
long ago been put by, in one of the deep drawers of the dresser, to
be kept for Mary. He wondered if it was there yet, and with a strange
curiosity he got up to feel for it; for the fire by this time was
well-nigh out, and candle he had none. His groping hand fell on
the piled-up tea things, which at his desire she had left unwashed
till morning--they were all so tired. He was reminded of one of the
daily little actions, which acquire such power when they have been
performed for the last time, by one we love. He began to think over
his wife's daily round of duties; and something in the remembrance
that these would never more be done by her, touched the source of
tears, and he cried aloud. Poor Mary, meanwhile, had mechanically
helped the neighbour in all the last attentions to the dead; and when
she was kissed, and spoken to soothingly, tears stole quietly down
her cheeks: but she reserved the luxury of a full burst of grief till
she should be alone. She shut the chamber-door softly, after the
neighbour had gone, and then shook the bed by which she knelt, with
her agony of sorrow. She repeated, over and over again, the same
words; the same vain, unanswered address to her who was no more. "Oh,
mother! mother, are you really dead! Oh, mother, mother!"

At last she stopped, because it flashed across her mind that her
violence of grief might disturb her father. All was still below. She
looked on the face so changed, and yet so strangely like. She bent
down to kiss it. The cold, unyielding flesh struck a shudder to her
heart, and, hastily obeying her impulse, she grasped the candle, and
opened the door. Then she heard the sobs of her father's grief; and
quickly, quietly, stealing down the steps, she knelt by him, and
kissed his hand. He took no notice at first, for his burst of grief
would not be controlled. But when her shriller sobs, her terrified
cries (which she could not repress), rose upon his ear, he checked
himself.

"Child, we must be all to one another, now _she_ is gone," whispered
he.

"Oh, father, what can I do for you? Do tell me! I'll do any thing."

"I know thou wilt. Thou must not fret thyself ill, that's the first
thing I ask. Thou must leave me, and go to bed now, like a good girl
as thou art."

"Leave you, father! oh, don't say so."

"Ay, but thou must! thou must go to bed, and try and sleep; thou'lt
have enough to do and to bear, poor wench, to-morrow."

Mary got up, kissed her father, and sadly went up stairs to the
little closet, where she slept. She thought it was of no use
undressing, for that she could never, never sleep, so threw herself
on her bed in her clothes, and before ten minutes had passed away,
the passionate grief of youth had subsided into sleep.

Barton had been roused by his daughter's entrance, both from his
stupor and from his uncontrollable sorrow. He could think on what was
to be done, could plan for the funeral, could calculate the necessity
of soon returning to his work, as the extravagance of the past night
would leave them short of money, if he long remained away from the
mill. He was in a club, so that money was provided for the burial.
These things settled in his own mind, he recalled the doctor's words,
and bitterly thought of the shock his poor wife had so recently had,
in the mysterious disappearance of her cherished sister. His feelings
towards Esther almost amounted to curses. It was she who had brought
on all this sorrow. Her giddiness, her lightness of conduct, had
wrought this woe. His previous thoughts about her had been tinged
with wonder and pity, but now he hardened his heart against her for
ever.

One of the good influences over John Barton's life had departed that
night. One of the ties which bound him down to the gentle humanities
of earth was loosened, and henceforward the neighbours all remarked
he was a changed man. His gloom and his sternness became habitual
instead of occasional. He was more obstinate. But never to Mary.
Between the father and the daughter there existed in full force that
mysterious bond which unites those who have been loved by one who
is now dead and gone. While he was harsh and silent to others, he
humoured Mary with tender love; she had more of her own way than
is common in any rank with girls of her age. Part of this was the
necessity of the case; for, of course, all the money went through
her hands, and the household arrangements were guided by her will
and pleasure. But part was her father's indulgence, for he left her,
with full trust in her unusual sense and spirit, to choose her own
associates, and her own times for seeing them.

With all this, Mary had not her father's confidence in the matters
which now began to occupy him, heart and soul; she was aware that
he had joined clubs, and become an active member of a trades' union,
but it was hardly likely that a girl of Mary's age (even when two or
three years had elapsed since her mother's death) should care much
for the differences between the employers and the employed,--an
eternal subject for agitation in the manufacturing districts, which,
however it may be lulled for a time, is sure to break forth again
with fresh violence at any depression of trade, showing that in its
apparent quiet, the ashes had still smouldered in the breasts of a
few.

Among these few was John Barton. At all times it is a bewildering
thing to the poor weaver to see his employer removing from house to
house, each one grander than the last, till he ends in building one
more magnificent than all, or withdraws his money from the concern,
or sells his mill to buy an estate in the country, while all the time
the weaver, who thinks he and his fellows are the real makers of this
wealth, is struggling on for bread for their children, through the
vicissitudes of lowered wages, short hours, fewer hands employed,
&c. And when he knows trade is bad, and could understand (at least
partially) that there are not buyers enough in the market to purchase
the goods already made, and consequently that there is no demand for
more; when he would bear and endure much without complaining, could
he also see that his employers were bearing their share; he is, I
say, bewildered and (to use his own word) "aggravated" to see that
all goes on just as usual with the mill-owners. Large houses are
still occupied, while spinners' and weavers' cottages stand empty,
because the families that once occupied them are obliged to live in
rooms or cellars. Carriages still roll along the streets, concerts
are still crowded by subscribers, the shops for expensive luxuries
still find daily customers, while the workman loiters away his
unemployed time in watching these things, and thinking of the pale,
uncomplaining wife at home, and the wailing children asking in vain
for enough of food, of the sinking health, of the dying life of those
near and dear to him. The contrast is too great. Why should he alone
suffer from bad times?

I know that this is not really the case; and I know what is the truth
in such matters: but what I wish to impress is what the workman feels
and thinks. True, that with child-like improvidence, good times will
often dissipate his grumbling, and make him forget all prudence and
foresight.

But there are earnest men among these people, men who have endured
wrongs without complaining, but without ever forgetting or forgiving
those whom (they believe) have caused all this woe.

Among these was John Barton. His parents had suffered, his mother
had died from absolute want of the necessaries of life. He himself
was a good, steady workman, and, as such, pretty certain of steady
employment. But he spent all he got with the confidence (you may also
call it improvidence) of one who was willing, and believed himself
able, to supply all his wants by his own exertions. And when his
master suddenly failed, and all hands in that mill were turned back,
one Tuesday morning, with the news that Mr. Hunter had stopped,
Barton had only a few shillings to rely on; but he had good heart of
being employed at some other mill, and accordingly, before returning
home, he spent some hours in going from factory to factory, asking
for work. But at every mill was some sign of depression of trade;
some were working short hours, some were turning off hands, and for
weeks Barton was out of work, living on credit. It was during this
time his little son, the apple of his eye, the cynosure of all his
strong power of love, fell ill of the scarlet fever. They dragged him
through the crisis, but his life hung on a gossamer thread. Every
thing, the doctor said, depended on good nourishment, on generous
living, to keep up the little fellow's strength, in the prostration
in which the fever had left him. Mocking words! when the commonest
food in the house would not furnish one little meal. Barton tried
credit; but it was worn out at the little provision shops, which were
now suffering in their turn. He thought it would be no sin to steal,
and would have stolen; but he could not get the opportunity in the
few days the child lingered. Hungry himself, almost to an animal
pitch of ravenousness, but with the bodily pain swallowed up in
anxiety for his little sinking lad, he stood at one of the shop
windows where all edible luxuries are displayed; haunches of venison,
Stilton cheeses, moulds of jelly--all appetising sights to the common
passer by. And out of this shop came Mrs. Hunter! She crossed to her
carriage, followed by the shopman loaded with purchases for a party.
The door was quickly slammed to, and she drove away; and Barton
returned home with a bitter spirit of wrath in his heart, to see his
only boy a corpse!

You can fancy, now, the hoards of vengeance in his heart against the
employers. For there are never wanting those who, either in speech
or in print, find it their interest to cherish such feelings in the
working classes; who know how and when to rouse the dangerous power
at their command; and who use their knowledge with unrelenting
purpose to either party.

So while Mary took her own way, growing more spirited every day, and
growing in her beauty too, her father was chairman at many a trades'
union meeting; a friend of delegates, and ambitious of being a
delegate himself; a Chartist, and ready to do any thing for his
order.

But now times were good; and all these feelings were theoretical, not
practical. His most practical thought was getting Mary apprenticed to
a dressmaker; for he had never left off disliking a factory life for
a girl, on more accounts than one.

Mary must do something. The factories being, as I said, out of the
question, there were two things open--going out to service, and
the dressmaking business; and against the first of these, Mary set
herself with all the force of her strong will. What that will might
have been able to achieve had her father been against her, I cannot
tell; but he disliked the idea of parting with her, who was the light
of his hearth, the voice of his otherwise silent home. Besides, with
his ideas and feelings towards the higher classes, he considered
domestic servitude as a species of slavery; a pampering of artificial
wants on the one side, a giving-up of every right of leisure by day
and quiet rest by night on the other. How far his strong exaggerated
feelings had any foundation in truth, it is for you to judge. I am
afraid that Mary's determination not to go to service arose from far
less sensible thoughts on the subject than her father's. Three years
of independence of action (since her mother's death such a time
had now elapsed) had little inclined her to submit to rules as to
hours and associates, to regulate her dress by a mistress's ideas
of propriety, to lose the dear feminine privileges of gossiping
with a merry neighbour, and working night and day to help one who
was sorrowful. Besides all this, the sayings of her absent, her
mysterious aunt, Esther, had an unacknowledged influence over Mary.
She knew she was very pretty; the factory people as they poured from
the mills, and in their freedom told the truth (whatever it might be)
to every passer-by, had early let Mary into the secret of her beauty.
If their remarks had fallen on an unheeding ear, there were always
young men enough, in a different rank from her own, who were willing
to compliment the pretty weaver's daughter as they met her in the
streets. Besides, trust a girl of sixteen for knowing well if she is
pretty; concerning her plainness she may be ignorant. So with this
consciousness she had early determined that her beauty should make
her a lady; the rank she coveted the more for her father's abuse; the
rank to which she firmly believed her lost aunt Esther had arrived.
Now, while a servant must often drudge and be dirty, must be known as
a servant by all who visited at her master's house, a dressmaker's
apprentice must (or so Mary thought) be always dressed with a certain
regard to appearance; must never soil her hands, and need never
redden or dirty her face with hard labour. Before my telling you so
truly what folly Mary felt or thought, injures her without redemption
in your opinion, think what are the silly fancies of sixteen years of
age in every class, and under all circumstances. The end of all the
thoughts of father and daughter was, as I said before, Mary was to be
a dressmaker; and her ambition prompted her unwilling father to apply
at all the first establishments, to know on what terms of painstaking
and zeal his daughter might be admitted into ever so humble a
workwoman's situation. But high premiums were asked at all; poor man!
he might have known that without giving up a day's work to ascertain
the fact. He would have been indignant, indeed, had he known that if
Mary had accompanied him, the case might have been rather different,
as her beauty would have made her desirable as a show-woman. Then he
tried second-rate places; at all the payment of a sum of money was
necessary, and money he had none. Disheartened and angry he went home
at night, declaring it was time lost; that dressmaking was at all
events a toilsome business, and not worth learning. Mary saw that the
grapes were sour, and the next day set out herself, as her father
could not afford to lose another day's work; and before night (as
yesterday's experience had considerably lowered her ideas) she had
engaged herself as apprentice (so called, though there were no deeds
or indentures to the bond) to a certain Miss Simmonds, milliner and
dressmaker, in a respectable little street leading off Ardwick Green,
where her business was duly announced in gold letters on a black
ground, enclosed in a bird's-eye maple frame, and stuck in the front
parlour window; where the workwomen were called "her young ladies;"
and where Mary was to work for two years without any remuneration,
on consideration of being taught the business; and where afterwards
she was to dine and have tea, with a small quarterly salary (paid
quarterly, because so much more genteel than by the week), a _very_
small one, divisible into a minute weekly pittance. In summer she was
to be there by six, bringing her day's meals during the first two
years; in winter she was not to come till after breakfast. Her time
for returning home at night must always depend upon the quantity of
work Miss Simmonds had to do.

And Mary was satisfied; and seeing this, her father was contented
too, although his words were grumbling and morose; but Mary knew his
ways, and coaxed and planned for the future so cheerily, that both
went to bed with easy if not happy hearts.




CHAPTER IV.

OLD ALICE'S HISTORY.


   To envy nought beneath the ample sky;
   To mourn no evil deed, no hour mis-spent;
   And, like a living violet, silently
   Return in sweets to Heaven what goodness lent,
   Then bend beneath the chastening shower content.

   ELLIOTT.


Another year passed on. The waves of time seemed long since to have
swept away all trace of poor Mary Barton. But her husband still
thought of her, although with a calm and quiet grief, in the silent
watches of the night: and Mary would start from her hard-earned
sleep, and think in her half-dreamy, half-awakened state, she saw
her mother stand by her bed-side, as she used to do "in the days
of long-ago;" with a shaded candle and an expression of ineffable
tenderness, while she looked on her sleeping child. But Mary rubbed
her eyes and sank back on her pillow, awake, and knowing it was a
dream; and still, in all her troubles and perplexities, her heart
called on her mother for aid, and she thought, "If mother had but
lived, she would have helped me." Forgetting that the woman's sorrows
are far more difficult to mitigate than a child's, even by the mighty
power of a mother's love; and unconscious of the fact, that she was
far superior in sense and spirit to the mother she mourned. Aunt
Esther was still mysteriously absent, and people had grown weary of
wondering and began to forget. Barton still attended his club, and
was an active member of a trades' union; indeed, more frequently
than ever, since the time of Mary's return in the evening was so
uncertain; and, as she occasionally, in very busy times, remained
all night. His chiefest friend was still George Wilson, although he
had no great sympathy on the questions that agitated Barton's mind.
Still their hearts were bound by old ties to one another, and the
remembrance of former times gave an unspoken charm to their meetings.
Our old friend, the cub-like lad, Jem Wilson, had shot up into the
powerful, well-made young man, with a sensible face enough; nay, a
face that might have been handsome, had it not been here and there
marked by the small-pox. He worked with one of the great firms of
engineers, who send from out their towns of workshops engines and
machinery to the dominions of the Czar and the Sultan. His father and
mother were never weary of praising Jem, at all which commendation
pretty Mary Barton would toss her head, seeing clearly enough that
they wished her to understand what a good husband he would make, and
to favour his love, about which he never dared to speak, whatever
eyes and looks revealed.

One day, in the early winter time, when people were provided with
warm substantial gowns, not likely soon to wear out, and when,
accordingly, business was rather slack at Miss Simmonds', Mary
met Alice Wilson, coming home from her half-day's work at some
tradesman's house. Mary and Alice had always liked each other;
indeed, Alice looked with particular interest on the motherless girl,
the daughter of her whose forgiving kiss had so comforted her in many
sleepless hours. So there was a warm greeting between the tidy old
woman and the blooming young work-girl; and then Alice ventured to
ask if she would come in and take her tea with her that very evening.

"You'll think it dull enough to come just to sit with an old woman
like me, but there's a tidy young lass as lives in the floor above,
who does plain work, and now and then a bit in your own line, Mary;
she's grand-daughter to old Job Legh, a spinner, and a good girl she
is. Do come, Mary! I've a terrible wish to make you known to each
other. She's a genteel-looking lass, too."

At the beginning of this speech Mary had feared the intended
visitor was to be no other than Alice's nephew; but Alice was too
delicate-minded to plan a meeting, even for her dear Jem, when one
would have been an unwilling party; and Mary, relieved from her
apprehension by the conclusion, gladly agreed to come. How busy Alice
felt! it was not often she had any one to tea; and now her sense of
the duties of a hostess were almost too much for her. She made haste
home, and lighted the unwilling fire, borrowing a pair of bellows to
make it burn the faster. For herself she was always patient; she let
the coals take their time. Then she put on her pattens, and went to
fill her kettle at the pump in the next court, and on the way she
borrowed a cup; of odd saucers she had plenty, serving as plates
when occasion required. Half an ounce of tea and a quarter of a
pound of butter went far to absorb her morning's wages; but this
was an unusual occasion. In general, she used herb-tea for herself,
when at home, unless some thoughtful mistress made her a present of
tea-leaves from her more abundant household. The two chairs drawn out
for visitors, and duly swept and dusted; an old board arranged with
some skill upon two old candle-boxes set on end (rather ricketty
to be sure, but she knew the seat of old, and when to sit lightly;
indeed the whole affair was more for apparent dignity of position
than for any real ease); a little, very little round table put
just before the fire, which by this time was blazing merrily; her
unlackered, ancient, third-hand tea-tray arranged with a black
tea-pot, two cups with a red and white pattern, and one with the
old friendly willow pattern, and saucers, not to match (on one
of the extra supply, the lump of butter flourished away); all
these preparations complete, Alice began to look about her with
satisfaction, and a sort of wonder what more could be done to add to
the comfort of the evening. She took one of the chairs away from its
appropriate place by the table, and putting it close to the broad
large hanging shelf I told you about when I first described her
cellar-dwelling, and mounting on it, she pulled towards her an old
deal box, and took thence a quantity of the oat bread of the north,
the clap-bread of Cumberland and Westmoreland, and descending
carefully with the thin cakes threatening to break to pieces in her
hand, she placed them on the bare table, with the belief that her
visitors would have an unusual treat in eating the bread of her
childhood. She brought out a good piece of a four-pound loaf of
common household bread as well, and then sat down to rest, really
to rest, and not to pretend, on one of the rush-bottomed chairs.
The candle was ready to be lighted, the kettle boiled, the tea was
awaiting its doom in its paper parcel; all was ready.

A knock at the door! It was Margaret, the young workwoman who lived
in the rooms above, who having heard the bustle, and the subsequent
quiet, began to think it was time to pay her visit below. She was a
sallow, unhealthy, sweet-looking young woman, with a careworn look;
her dress was humble and very simple, consisting of some kind of
dark stuff gown, her neck being covered by a drab shawl or large
handkerchief, pinned down behind and at the sides in front. The old
woman gave her a hearty greeting, and made her sit down on the chair
she had just left, while she balanced herself on the board seat, in
order that Margaret might think it was quite her free and independent
choice to sit there.

"I cannot think what keeps Mary Barton. She's quite grand with her
late hours," said Alice, as Mary still delayed.

The truth was, Mary was dressing herself; yes, to come to poor old
Alice's--she thought it worth while to consider what gown she should
put on. It was not for Alice, however, you may be pretty sure; no,
they knew each other too well. But Mary liked making an impression,
and in this it must be owned she was pretty often gratified--and
there was this strange girl to consider just now. So she put on her
pretty new blue merino, made tight to her throat, her little linen
collar and linen cuffs, and sallied forth to impress poor gentle
Margaret. She certainly succeeded. Alice, who never thought much
about beauty, had never told Margaret how pretty Mary was; and, as
she came in half-blushing at her own self-consciousness, Margaret
could hardly take her eyes off her, and Mary put down her long black
lashes with a sort of dislike of the very observation she had taken
such pains to secure. Can you fancy the bustle of Alice to make the
tea, to pour it out, and sweeten it to their liking, to help and help
again to clap-bread and bread-and-butter? Can you fancy the delight
with which she watched her piled-up clap-bread disappear before the
hungry girls, and listened to the praises of her home-remembered
dainty?

"My mother used to send me some clap-bread by any north-country
person--bless her! She knew how good such things taste when far away
from home. Not but what every one likes it. When I was in service my
fellow-servants were always glad to share with me. Eh, it's a long
time ago, yon."

"Do tell us about it, Alice," said Margaret.

"Why, lass, there's nothing to tell. There was more mouths at home
than could be fed. Tom, that's Will's father (you don't know Will,
but he's a sailor to foreign parts), had come to Manchester, and sent
word what terrible lots of work was to be had, both for lads and
lasses. So father sent George first (you know George, well enough,
Mary), and then work was scarce out toward Burton, where we lived,
and father said I maun try and get a place. And George wrote as how
wages were far higher in Manchester than Milnthorpe or Lancaster;
and, lasses, I was young and thoughtless, and thought it was a fine
thing to go so far from home. So, one day, th' butcher he brings us a
letter fra George, to say he'd heard on a place--and I was all agog
to go, and father was pleased, like; but mother said little, and that
little was very quiet. I've often thought she was a bit hurt to see
me so ready to go--God forgive me! But she packed up my clothes, and
some o' the better end of her own as would fit me, in yon little
paper box up there--it's good for nought now, but I would liefer live
without fire than break it up to be burnt; and yet it's going on for
eighty years old, for she had it when she was a girl, and brought all
her clothes in it to father's, when they were married. But, as I was
saying, she did not cry, though the tears was often in her eyes; and
I seen her looking after me down the lane as long as I were in sight,
with her hand shading her eyes--and that were the last look I ever
had on her."

Alice knew that before long she should go to that mother; and,
besides, the griefs and bitter woes of youth have worn themselves out
before we grow old; but she looked so sorrowful that the girls caught
her sadness, and mourned for the poor woman who had been dead and
gone so many years ago.

"Did you never see her again, Alice? Did you never go home while she
was alive?" asked Mary.

"No, nor since. Many a time and oft have I planned to go. I plan
it yet, and hope to go home again before it please God to take me.
I used to try and save money enough to go for a week when I was in
service; but first one thing came, and then another. First, missis's
children fell ill of the measles, just when th' week I'd ask'd for
came, and I couldn't leave them, for one and all cried for me to
nurse them. Then missis herself fell sick, and I could go less than
ever. For, you see, they kept a little shop, and he drank, and missis
and me was all there was to mind children, and shop, and all, and
cook and wash besides."

Mary was glad she had not gone into service, and said so.

"Eh, lass! thou little knows the pleasure o' helping others; I was as
happy there as could be; almost as happy as I was at home. Well, but
next year I thought I could go at a leisure time, and missis telled
me I should have a fortnight then, and I used to sit up all that
winter working hard at patchwork, to have a quilt of my own making
to take to my mother. But master died, and missis went away fra
Manchester, and I'd to look out for a place again."

"Well, but," interrupted Mary, "I should have thought that was the
best time to go home."

"No, I thought not. You see it was a different thing going home for
a week on a visit, may be with money in my pocket to give father a
lift, to going home to be a burden to him. Besides, how could I hear
o' a place there? Anyways I thought it best to stay, though perhaps
it might have been better to ha' gone, for then I should ha' seen
mother again;" and the poor old woman looked puzzled.

"I'm sure you did what you thought right," said Margaret, gently.

"Ay, lass, that's it," said Alice, raising her head and speaking more
cheerfully. "That's the thing, and then let the Lord send what He
sees fit; not but that I grieved sore, oh, sore and sad, when toward
spring next year, when my quilt were all done to th' lining, George
came in one evening to tell me mother was dead. I cried many a
night at after; [3] I'd no time for crying by day, for that missis
was terrible strict; she would not hearken to my going to th'
funeral; and indeed I would have been too late, for George set off
that very night by th' coach, and th' letter had been kept or summut
(posts were not like th' posts now-a-days), and he found the burial
all over, and father talking o' flitting; for he couldn't abide the
cottage after mother was gone."


   [Footnote 3: A common Lancashire phrase. "Come to me, Tyrrel,
                soon, _at after_ supper." SHAKSPEARE, Richard III.]


"Was it a pretty place?" asked Mary.

"Pretty, lass! I never seed such a bonny bit anywhere. You see there
are hills there as seem to go up into th' skies, not near may be, but
that makes them all the bonnier. I used to think they were the golden
hills of heaven, about which my mother sang when I was a child,

   'Yon are the golden hills o' heaven,
      Where ye sall never win.'

Something about a ship and a lover that should hae been na lover,
the ballad was. Well, and near our cottage were rocks. Eh, lasses!
ye don't know what rocks are in Manchester! Gray pieces o' stone as
large as a house, all covered over wi' moss of different colours,
some yellow, some brown; and the ground beneath them knee-deep in
purple heather, smelling sae sweet and fragrant, and the low music of
the humming-bee for ever sounding among it. Mother used to send Sally
and me out to gather ling and heather for besoms, and it was such
pleasant work! We used to come home of an evening loaded so as you
could not see us, for all that it was so light to carry. And then
mother would make us sit down under the old hawthorn tree (where
we used to make our house among the great roots as stood above th'
ground), to pick and tie up the heather. It seems all like yesterday,
and yet it's a long long time agone. Poor sister Sally has been
in her grave this forty year and more. But I often wonder if the
hawthorn is standing yet, and if the lasses still go to gather
heather, as we did many and many a year past and gone. I sicken at
heart to see the old spot once again. May be next summer I may set
off, if God spares me to see next summer."

"Why have you never been in all these many years?" asked Mary.

"Why, lass! first one wanted me and then another; and I couldn't
go without money either, and I got very poor at times. Tom was a
scapegrace, poor fellow, and always wanted help of one kind or
another; and his wife (for I think scapegraces are always married
long before steady folk) was but a helpless kind of body. She were
always ailing, and he were always in trouble; so I had enough to do
with my hands and my money too, for that matter. They died within
twelvemonth of each other, leaving one lad (they had had seven, but
the Lord had taken six to Himself), Will, as I was telling you on;
and I took him myself, and left service to make a bit on a home-place
for him, and a fine lad he was, the very spit of his father as to
looks, only steadier. For he was steady, although nought would serve
him but going to sea. I tried all I could to set him again a sailor's
life. Says I, 'Folks is as sick as dogs all the time they're at sea.
Your own mother telled me (for she came from foreign parts, being a
Manx woman) that she'd ha thanked any one for throwing her into the
water.' Nay, I sent him a' the way to Runcorn by th' Duke's canal,
that he might know what th' sea were; and I looked to see him come
back as white as a sheet wi' vomiting. But the lad went on to
Liverpool and saw real ships, and came back more set than ever on
being a sailor, and he said as how he had never been sick at all, and
thought he could stand the sea pretty well. So I telled him he mun
do as he liked; and he thanked me and kissed me, for all I was very
frabbit [4] with him; and now he's gone to South America, at t'other
side of the sun, they tell me."


   [Footnote 4: "Frabbit," peevish.]


Mary stole a glance at Margaret to see what she thought of Alice's
geography; but Margaret looked so quiet and demure, that Mary was in
doubt if she were not really ignorant. Not that Mary's knowledge was
very profound, but she had seen a terrestrial globe, and knew where
to find France and the continents on a map.

After this long talking Alice seemed lost for a time in reverie; and
the girls, respecting her thoughts, which they suspected had wandered
to the home and scenes of her childhood, were silent. All at once she
recalled her duties as hostess, and by an effort brought back her
mind to the present time.

"Margaret, thou must let Mary hear thee sing. I don't know about fine
music myself, but folks say Margaret is a rare singer, and I know she
can make me cry at any time by singing 'Th' Owdham Weaver.' Do sing
that, Margaret, there's a good lass."

With a faint smile, as if amused at Alice's choice of a song,
Margaret began.

Do you know "The Oldham Weaver?" Not unless you are Lancashire born
and bred, for it is a complete Lancashire ditty. I will copy it for
you.


   THE OLDHAM WEAVER.

   I.

   Oi'm a poor cotton-weyver, as mony a one knoowas,
   Oi've nowt for t' yeat, an' oi've woorn eawt my clooas,
   Yo'ad hardly gi' tuppence for aw as oi've on,
   My clogs are boath brosten, an' stuckins oi've none,
      Yo'd think it wur hard,
      To be browt into th' warld,
   To be--clemmed, [5] an' do th' best as yo con.

   II.

   Owd Dicky o' Billy's kept telling me lung,
   Wee s'd ha' better toimes if I'd but howd my tung,
   Oi've howden my tung, till oi've near stopped my breath,
   Oi think i' my heeart oi'se soon clem to deeath,
      Owd Dicky's weel crammed,
      He never wur clemmed,
   An' he ne'er picked ower i' his loife. [6]

   III.

   We tow'rt on six week--thinking aitch day wur th' last,
   We shifted, an' shifted, till neaw we're quoite fast;
   We lived upo' nettles, whoile nettles wur good,
   An' Waterloo porridge the best o' eawr food,
      Oi'm tellin' yo' true,
      Oi can find folk enow,
   As wur livin' na better nor me.

   IV.

   Owd Billy o' Dans sent th' baileys one day,
   Fur a shop deebt oi eawd him, as oi could na pay,
   But he wur too lat, fur owd Billy o' th' Bent,
   Had sowd th' tit an' cart, an' ta'en goods fur th' rent,
      We'd neawt left bo' th' owd stoo',
      That wur seeats fur two,
   An' on it ceawred Marget an' me.

   V.

   Then t' baileys leuked reawnd as sloy as a meawse,
   When they seed as aw t' goods were ta'en eawt o' t' heawse,
   Says one chap to th' tother, "Aws gone, theaw may see;"
   Says oi, "Ne'er freet, mon, yeaur welcome ta' me."
      They made no moor ado
      But whopped up th' eawd stoo',
   An' we booath leet, whack--upo' t' flags!

   VI.

   Then oi said to eawr Marget, as we lay upo' t' floor,
   "We's never be lower i' this warld, oi'm sure,
   If ever things awtern, oi'm sure they mun mend,
   For oi think i' my heart we're booath at t' far eend;
      For meeat we ha' none;
      Nor looms t' weyve on,--
   Edad! they're as good lost as fund."

   VII.

   Eawr Marget declares had hoo cloo'as to put on,
   Hoo'd goo up to Lunnon an' talk to th' greet mon;
   An' if things were na awtered when there hoo had been,
   Hoo's fully resolved t' sew up meawth an' eend;
      Hoo's neawt to say again t' king,
      But hoo loikes a fair thing,
   An' hoo says hoo can tell when hoo's hurt.


   [Footnote 5: "Clem," to starve with hunger. "Hard is the
                choice, when the valiant must eat their arms
                or _clem_."--_Ben Jonson._]

   [Footnote 6: To "pick ower," means to throw the shuttle in
                hand-loom weaving.]


The air to which this is sung is a kind of droning recitative,
depending much on expression and feeling. To read it, it may,
perhaps, seem humorous; but it is that humour which is near akin
to pathos, and to those who have seen the distress it describes,
it is a powerfully pathetic song. Margaret had both witnessed the
destitution, and had the heart to feel it; and withal, her voice was
of that rich and rare order, which does not require any great compass
of notes to make itself appreciated. Alice had her quiet enjoyment of
tears. But Margaret, with fixed eye, and earnest, dreamy look, seemed
to become more and more absorbed in realising to herself the woe she
had been describing, and which she felt might at that very moment be
suffering and hopeless within a short distance of their comparative
comfort.

Suddenly she burst forth with all the power of her magnificent voice,
as if a prayer from her very heart for all who were in distress, in
the grand supplication, "Lord, remember David." Mary held her breath,
unwilling to lose a note, it was so clear, so perfect, so imploring.
A far more correct musician than Mary might have paused with equal
admiration of the really scientific knowledge, with which the poor
depressed-looking young needle-woman used her superb and flexile
voice. Deborah Travers herself (once an Oldham factory girl, and
afterwards the darling of fashionable crowds as Mrs. Knyvett) might
have owned a sister in her art.

She stopped; and with tears of holy sympathy in her eyes, Alice
thanked the songstress, who resumed her calm, demure manner, much to
Mary's wonder, for she looked at her unweariedly, as if surprised
that the hidden power should not be perceived in the outward
appearance.

When Alice's little speech of thanks was over, there was quiet enough
to hear a fine, though rather quavering, male voice, going over again
one or two strains of Margaret's song.

"That's grandfather!" exclaimed she. "I must be going, for he said he
should not be at home till past nine."

"Well, I'll not say nay, for I've to be up by four for a very heavy
wash at Mrs. Simpson's; but I shall be terrible glad to see you again
at any time, lasses; and I hope you'll take to one another."

As the girls ran up the cellar steps together, Margaret said: "Just
step in and see grandfather. I should like him to see you."

And Mary consented.




CHAPTER V.

THE MILL ON FIRE--JEM WILSON TO THE RESCUE.


   Learned he was; nor bird, nor insect flew,
   But he its leafy home and history knew;
   Nor wild-flower decked the rock, nor moss the well,
   But he its name and qualities could tell.

   ELLIOTT.


There is a class of men in Manchester, unknown even to many of the
inhabitants, and whose existence will probably be doubted by many,
who yet may claim kindred with all the noble names that science
recognises. I said "in Manchester," but they are scattered all over
the manufacturing districts of Lancashire. In the neighbourhood of
Oldham there are weavers, common hand-loom weavers, who throw the
shuttle with unceasing sound, though Newton's "Principia" lie open on
the loom, to be snatched at in work hours, but revelled over in meal
times, or at night. Mathematical problems are received with interest,
and studied with absorbing attention by many a broad-spoken,
common-looking, factory-hand. It is perhaps less astonishing that the
more popularly interesting branches of natural history have their
warm and devoted followers among this class. There are botanists
among them, equally familiar with either the Linnæan or the Natural
system, who know the name and habitat of every plant within a day's
walk from their dwellings; who steal the holiday of a day or two when
any particular plant should be in flower, and tying up their simple
food in their pocket-handkerchiefs, set off with single purpose to
fetch home the humble-looking weed. There are entomologists, who may
be seen with a rude-looking net, ready to catch any winged insect,
or a kind of dredge, with which they rake the green and slimy pools;
practical, shrewd, hard-working men, who pore over every new specimen
with real scientific delight. Nor is it the common and more obvious
divisions of Entomology and Botany that alone attract these earnest
seekers after knowledge. Perhaps it may be owing to the great annual
town-holiday of Whitsun-week so often falling in May or June that the
two great, beautiful families of Ephemeridæ and Phryganidæ have been
so much and so closely studied by Manchester workmen, while they have
in a great measure escaped general observation. If you will refer
to the preface to Sir J. E. Smith's Life (I have it not by me, or
I would copy you the exact passage), you will find that he names
a little circumstance corroborative of what I have said. Sir J. E.
Smith, being on a visit to Roscoe, of Liverpool, made some inquiries
from him as to the habitat of a very rare plant, said to be found in
certain places in Lancashire. Mr. Roscoe knew nothing of the plant;
but stated, that if any one could give him the desired information,
it would be a hand-loom weaver in Manchester, whom he named. Sir J.
E. Smith proceeded by coach to Manchester, and on arriving at that
town, he inquired of the porter who was carrying his luggage if he
could direct him to So and So.

"Oh, yes," replied the man. "He does a bit in my way;" and, on
further investigation, it turned out, that both the porter, and his
friend the weaver, were skilful botanists, and able to give Sir J. E.
Smith the very information which he wanted.

Such are the tastes and pursuits of some of the thoughtful, little
understood, working men of Manchester.

And Margaret's grandfather was one of these. He was a little
wiry-looking old man, who moved with a jerking motion, as if his
limbs were worked by a string like a child's toy, with dun coloured
hair lying thin and soft at the back and sides of his head; his
forehead was so large it seemed to overbalance the rest of his face,
which had indeed lost its natural contour by the absence of all the
teeth. The eyes absolutely gleamed with intelligence; so keen, so
observant, you felt as if they were almost wizard-like. Indeed, the
whole room looked not unlike a wizard's dwelling. Instead of pictures
were hung rude wooden frames of impaled insects; the little table was
covered with cabalistic books; and a case of mysterious instruments
lay beside, one of which Job Legh was using when his grand-daughter
entered.

On her appearance he pushed his spectacles up so as to rest midway
on his forehead, and gave Mary a short, kind welcome. But Margaret
he caressed as a mother caresses her first-born; stroking her with
tenderness, and almost altering his voice as he spoke to her.

Mary looked round on the odd, strange things she had never seen at
home, and which seemed to her to have a very uncanny look.

"Is your grandfather a fortune-teller?" whispered she to her new
friend.

"No," replied Margaret, in the same voice; "but you're not the first
as has taken him for such. He is only fond of such things as most
folks know nothing about."

"And do you know aught about them, too?"

"I know a bit about some of the things grandfather is fond on; just
because he's fond on 'em I tried to learn about them."

"What things are these?" said Mary, struck with the weird looking
creatures that sprawled around the room in their roughly-made glass
cases.

But she was not prepared for the technical names which Job Legh
pattered down on her ear, on which they fell like hail on a skylight;
and the strange language only bewildered her more than ever. Margaret
saw the state of the case, and came to the rescue.

"Look, Mary, at this horrid scorpion. He gave me such a fright:
I'm all of a twitter yet when I think of it. Grandfather went to
Liverpool one Whitsun-week to go strolling about the docks and pick
up what he could from the sailors, who often bring some queer thing
or another from the hot countries they go to; and so he sees a chap
with a bottle in his hand, like a druggist's physic-bottle; and says
grandfather, 'What have ye gotten there?' So the sailor holds it up,
and grandfather knew it was a rare kind o' scorpion, not common even
in the East Indies where the man came from; and says he, 'How did
ye catch this fine fellow, for he wouldn't be taken for nothing I'm
thinking?' And the man said as how when they were unloading the ship
he'd found him lying behind a bag of rice, and he thought the cold
had killed him, for he was not squashed nor injured a bit. He did
not like to part with any of the spirit out of his grog to put the
scorpion in, but slipped him into the bottle, knowing there were
folks enow who would give him something for him. So grandfather gives
him a shilling."

"Two shilling," interrupted Job Legh, "and a good bargain it was."

"Well! grandfather came home as proud as Punch, and pulled the bottle
out of his pocket. But you see th' scorpion were doubled up, and
grandfather thought I couldn't fairly see how big he was. So he
shakes him out right before the fire; and a good warm one it was, for
I was ironing, I remember. I left off ironing, and stooped down over
him, to look at him better, and grandfather got a book, and began to
read how this very kind were the most poisonous and vicious species,
how their bite were often fatal, and then went on to read how people
who were bitten got swelled, and screamed with pain. I was listening
hard, but as it fell out, I never took my eyes off the creature,
though I could not ha' told I was watching it. Suddenly it seemed
to give a jerk, and before I could speak, it gave another, and in
a minute it was as wild as could be, running at me just like a mad
dog."

"What did you do?" asked Mary.

"Me! why, I jumped first on a chair, and then on all the things I'd
been ironing on the dresser, and I screamed for grandfather to come
up by me, but he did not hearken to me."

"Why, if I'd come up by thee, who'd ha' caught the creature, I should
like to know?"

"Well, I begged grandfather to crush it, and I had the iron right
over it once, ready to drop, but grandfather begged me not to hurt it
in that way. So I couldn't think what he'd have, for he hopped round
the room as if he were sore afraid, for all he begged me not to
injure it. At last he goes to th' kettle, and lifts up the lid, and
peeps in. What on earth is he doing that for, thinks I; he'll never
drink his tea with a scorpion running free and easy about the room.
Then he takes the tongs, and he settles his spectacles on his nose,
and in a minute he had lifted the creature up by th' leg, and dropped
him into the boiling water."

"And did that kill him?" said Mary.

"Ay, sure enough; he boiled for longer time than grandfather liked
though. But I was so afeard of his coming round again. I ran to the
public-house for some gin, and grandfather filled the bottle, and
then we poured off the water, and picked him out of the kettle, and
dropped him into the bottle, and he were there above a twelvemonth."

"What brought him to life at first?" asked Mary.

"Why, you see, he were never really dead, only torpid--that is, dead
asleep with the cold, and our good fire brought him round."

"I'm glad father does not care for such things," said Mary.

"Are you! Well, I'm often downright glad grandfather is so fond of
his books, and his creatures, and his plants. It does my heart good
to see him so happy, sorting them all at home, and so ready to go in
search of more, whenever he's a spare day. Look at him now! he's gone
back to his books, and he'll be as happy as a king, working away till
I make him go to bed. It keeps him silent, to be sure; but so long
as I see him earnest, and pleased, and eager, what does that matter?
Then, when he has his talking bouts, you can't think how much he has
to say. Dear grandfather! you don't know how happy we are!"

Mary wondered if the dear grandfather heard all this, for Margaret
did not speak in an under tone; but no! he was far too deep and eager
in solving a problem. He did not even notice Mary's leave-taking,
and she went home with the feeling that she had that night made the
acquaintance of two of the strangest people she ever saw in her life.
Margaret, so quiet, so common place, until her singing powers were
called forth; so silent from home, so cheerful and agreeable at home;
and her grandfather so very different to any one Mary had ever seen.
Margaret had said he was not a fortune-teller, but she did not know
whether to believe her.

To resolve her doubts, she told the history of the evening to her
father, who was interested by her account, and curious to see
and judge for himself. Opportunities are not often wanting where
inclination goes before, and ere the end of that winter Mary looked
upon Margaret almost as an old friend. The latter would bring her
work when Mary was likely to be at home in the evenings and sit with
her; and Job Legh would put a book and his pipe in his pocket and
just step round the corner to fetch his grand-child, ready for a talk
if he found Barton in; ready to pull out pipe and book if the girls
wanted him to wait, and John was still at his club. In short, ready
to do whatever would give pleasure to his darling Margaret.

I do not know what points of resemblance (or dissimilitude, for the
one joins people as often as the other) attracted the two girls to
each other. Margaret had the great charm of possessing good strong
common sense, and do you not perceive how involuntarily this is
valued? It is so pleasant to have a friend who possesses the power
of setting a difficult question in a clear light; whose judgment can
tell what is best to be done; and who is so convinced of what is
"wisest, best," that in consideration of the end, all difficulties
in the way diminish. People admire talent, and talk about their
admiration. But they value common sense without talking about it, and
often without knowing it.

So Mary and Margaret grew in love one toward the other; and Mary told
many of her feelings in a way she had never done before to any one.
Most of her foibles also were made known to Margaret, but not all.
There was one cherished weakness still concealed from every one. It
concerned a lover, not beloved, but favoured by fancy. A gallant,
handsome young man; but--not beloved. Yet Mary hoped to meet him
every day in her walks, blushed when she heard his name, and tried
to think of him as her future husband, and above all, tried to think
of herself as his future wife. Alas! poor Mary! Bitter woe did thy
weakness work thee.

She had other lovers. One or two would gladly have kept her company,
but she held herself too high, they said. Jem Wilson said nothing,
but loved on and on, ever more fondly; he hoped against hope; he
would not give up, for it seemed like giving up life to give up
thought of Mary. He did not dare to look to any end of all this; the
present, so that he saw her, touched the hem of her garment, was
enough. Surely, in time, such deep love would beget love.

He would not relinquish hope, and yet her coldness of manner was
enough to daunt any man; and it made Jem more despairing than he
would acknowledge for a long time even to himself.

But one evening he came round by Barton's house, a willing messenger
for his father, and opening the door saw Margaret sitting asleep
before the fire. She had come in to speak to Mary; and worn out by a
long working, watching night, she fell asleep in the genial warmth.

An old-fashioned saying about a pair of gloves came into Jem's mind,
and stepping gently up he kissed Margaret with a friendly kiss.

She awoke, and perfectly understanding the thing, she said, "For
shame of yourself, Jem! What would Mary say?"

Lightly said, lightly answered.

"She'd nobbut say, practice makes perfect." And they both laughed.
But the words Margaret had said rankled in Jem's mind. Would Mary
care? Would she care in the very least? They seemed to call for an
answer by night, and by day; and Jem felt that his heart told him
Mary was quite indifferent to any action of his. Still he loved on,
and on, ever more fondly.

Mary's father was well aware of the nature of Jem Wilson's feelings
for his daughter, but he took no notice of them to any one, thinking
Mary full young yet for the cares of married life, and unwilling,
too, to entertain the idea of parting with her at any time, however
distant. But he welcomed Jem at his house, as he would have done his
father's son, whatever were his motives for coming; and now and then
admitted the thought, that Mary might do worse when her time came,
than marry Jem Wilson, a steady workman at a good trade, a good son
to his parents, and a fine manly spirited chap--at least when Mary
was not by: for when she was present he watched her too closely, and
too anxiously, to have much of what John Barton called "spunk" in
him.

It was towards the end of February, in that year, and a bitter black
frost had lasted for many weeks. The keen east wind had long since
swept the streets clean, though on a gusty day the dust would rise
like pounded ice, and make people's faces quite smart with the cold
force with which it blew against them. Houses, sky, people, and every
thing looked as if a gigantic brush had washed them all over with
a dark shade of Indian ink. There was some reason for this grimy
appearance on human beings, whatever there might be for the dun looks
of the landscape; for soft water had become an article not even to
be purchased; and the poor washerwomen might be seen vainly trying
to procure a little by breaking the thick gray ice that coated the
ditches and ponds in the neighbourhood. People prophesied a long
continuance to this already lengthened frost; said the spring would
be very late; no spring fashions required; no summer clothing
purchased for a short uncertain summer. Indeed there was no end to
the evil prophesied during the continuance of that bleak east wind.

Mary hurried home one evening, just as daylight was fading, from Miss
Simmonds', with her shawl held up to her mouth, and her head bent
as if in deprecation of the meeting wind. So she did not perceive
Margaret till, she was close upon her at the very turning into the
court.

"Bless me, Margaret! is that you? Where are you bound to?"

"To nowhere but your own house (that is, if you'll take me in). I've
a job of work to finish to-night; mourning, as must be in time for
the funeral to-morrow; and grandfather has been out moss-hunting, and
will not be home till late."

"Oh, how charming it will be. I'll help you if you're backward. Have
you much to do?"

"Yes, I only got the order yesterday at noon; and there's three girls
beside the mother; and what with trying on and matching the stuff
(for there was not enough in the piece they chose first), I'm above
a bit behindhand. I've the skirts all to make. I kept that work till
candlelight; and the sleeves, to say nothing of little bits to the
bodies; for the missis is very particular, and I could scarce keep
from smiling while they were crying so, really taking on sadly I'm
sure, to hear first one and then t'other clear up to notice the sit
of her gown. They weren't to be misfits I promise you, though they
were in such trouble."

"Well, Margaret, you're right welcome as you know, and I'll sit down
and help you with pleasure, though I was tired enough of sewing
to-night at Miss Simmonds'."

By this time Mary had broken up the raking coal, and lighted her
candle; and Margaret settled herself to her work on one side of the
table, while her friend hurried over her tea at the other. The things
were then lifted _en masse_ to the dresser; and dusting her side of
the table with the apron she always wore at home, Mary took up some
breadths and began to run them together.

"Who's it all for, for if you told me I've forgotten?"

"Why for Mrs. Ogden as keeps the greengrocer's shop in Oxford Road.
Her husband drank himself to death, and though she cried over him and
his ways all the time he was alive, she's fretted sadly for him now
he's dead."

"Has he left her much to go upon?" asked Mary, examining the texture
of the dress. "This is beautifully fine soft bombazine."

"No, I'm much afeared there's but little, and there's several young
children, besides the three Miss Ogdens."

"I should have thought girls like them would ha' made their own
gowns," observed Mary.

"So I dare say they do, many a one, but now they seem all so busy
getting ready for the funeral; for it's to be quite a grand affair,
well-nigh twenty people to breakfast, as one of the little ones told
me; the little thing seemed to like the fuss, and I do believe it
comforted poor Mrs. Ogden to make all the piece o' work. Such a smell
of ham boiling and fowls roasting while I waited in the kitchen; it
seemed more like a wedding nor [7] a funeral. They said she'd spend a
matter o' sixty pound on th' burial."


   [Footnote 7: "Nor," generally used in Lancashire for "than."
                "They had lever sleep _nor_ be in
                laundery."--_Dunbar_.]


"I thought you said she was but badly off," said Mary.

"Ay, I know she's asked for credit at several places, saying her
husband laid hands on every farthing he could get for drink. But th'
undertakers urge her on you see, and tell her this thing's usual,
and that thing's only a common mark of respect, and that every body
has t'other thing, till the poor woman has no will o' her own. I
dare say, too, her heart strikes her (it always does when a person's
gone) for many a word and many a slighting deed to him, who's stiff
and cold; and she thinks to make up matters, as it were, by a grand
funeral, though she and all her children, too, may have to pinch many
a year to pay the expenses, if ever they pay them at all."

"This mourning, too, will cost a pretty penny," said Mary. "I often
wonder why folks wear mourning; it's not pretty or becoming; and it
costs a deal of money just when people can spare it least; and if
what the Bible tells us be true, we ought not to be sorry when a
friend, who's been good, goes to his rest; and as for a bad man,
one's glad enough to get shut [8] on him. I cannot see what good
comes out o' wearing mourning."


   [Footnote 8: "Shut," quit.]


"I'll tell you what I think th' fancy was sent for (Old Alice calls
every thing 'sent for,' and I believe she's right). It does do good,
though not as much as it costs, that I do believe, in setting people
(as is cast down by sorrow and feels themselves unable to settle to
any thing but crying) something to do. Why now I told you how they
were grieving; for, perhaps, he was a kind husband and father, in
his thoughtless way, when he wasn't in liquor. But they cheered up
wonderful while I was there, and I asked 'em for more directions than
usual, that they might have something to talk over and fix about; and
I left 'em my fashion-book (though it were two months old) just a
purpose."

"I don't think every one would grieve a that way. Old Alice
wouldn't."

"Old Alice is one in a thousand. I doubt, too, if she would fret
much, however sorry she might be. She would say it were sent, and
fall to trying to find out what good it were to do. Every sorrow in
her mind is sent for good. Did I ever tell you, Mary, what she said
one day when she found me taking on about something?"

"No; do tell me. What were you fretting about, first place?"

"I can't tell you just now; perhaps I may sometime."

"When?"

"Perhaps this very evening, if it rises in my heart; perhaps never.
It's a fear that sometimes I can't abide to think about, and
sometimes I don't like to think on any thing else. Well, I was
fretting about this fear, and Alice comes in for something, and finds
me crying. I would not tell her no more than I would you, Mary; so
she says, 'Well, dear, you must mind this, when you're going to fret
and be low about any thing, "An anxious mind is never a holy mind."'
Oh, Mary, I have so often checked my grumbling sin' [9] she said
that."


   [Footnote 9: "Sin'," since. "_Sin_ that his lord was twenty
                yere of age." _Prologue to Canterbury Tales._]


The weary sound of stitching was the only sound heard for a little
while, till Mary inquired,

"Do you expect to get paid for this mourning?"

"Why I do not much think I shall. I've thought it over once or twice,
and I mean to bring myself to think I shan't, and to like to do it as
my bit towards comforting them. I don't think they can pay, and yet
they're just the sort of folk to have their minds easier for wearing
mourning. There's only one thing I dislike making black for, it does
so hurt the eyes."

Margaret put down her work with a sigh, and shaded her eyes. Then she
assumed a cheerful tone, and said,

"You'll not have to wait long, Mary, for my secret's on the tip of
my tongue. Mary! do you know I sometimes think I'm growing a little
blind, and then what would become of grandfather and me? Oh, God help
me, Lord help me!"

She fell into an agony of tears, while Mary knelt by her, striving
to soothe and to comfort her; but, like an inexperienced person,
striving rather to deny the correctness of Margaret's fear, than
helping her to meet and overcome the evil.

"No," said Margaret, quietly fixing her tearful eyes on Mary; "I know
I'm not mistaken. I have felt one going some time, long before I ever
thought what it would lead to; and last autumn I went to a doctor;
and he did not mince the matter, but said unless I sat in a darkened
room, with my hands before me, my sight would not last me many years
longer. But how could I do that, Mary? For one thing, grandfather
would have known there was somewhat the matter; and, oh! it will
grieve him sore whenever he's told, so the later the better; and
besides, Mary, we've sometimes little enough to go upon, and what
I earn is a great help. For grandfather takes a day here, and a day
there, for botanising or going after insects, and he'll think little
enough of four or five shillings for a specimen; dear grandfather!
and I'm so loath to think he should be stinted of what gives him
such pleasure. So I went to another doctor to try and get him to say
something different, and he said, 'Oh, it was only weakness,' and
gived me a bottle of lotion; but I've used three bottles (and each of
'em cost two shillings), and my eye is so much worse, not hurting so
much, but I can't see a bit with it. There now, Mary," continued she,
shutting one eye, "now you only look like a great black shadow, with
the edges dancing and sparkling."

"And can you see pretty well with th' other?"

"Yes, pretty near as well as ever. Th' only difference is, that if
I sew a long time together, a bright spot like th' sun comes right
where I'm looking; all the rest is quite clear but just where I want
to see. I've been to both doctors again, and now they're both o' the
same story; and I suppose I'm going dark as fast as may be. Plain
work pays so bad, and mourning has been so plentiful this winter, I
were tempted to take in any black work I could; and now I'm suffering
from it."

"And yet, Margaret, you're going on taking it in; that's what you'd
call foolish in another."

"It is, Mary! and yet what can I do? Folk mun live; and I think I
should go blind any way, and I darn't tell grandfather, else I would
leave it off, but he will so fret."

Margaret rocked herself backward and forward to still her emotion.

"Oh Mary!" she said, "I try to get his face off by heart, and I stare
at him so when he's not looking, and then shut my eyes to see if I
can remember his dear face. There's one thing, Mary, that serves a
bit to comfort me. You'll have heard of old Jacob Butterworth, the
singing weaver? Well, I know'd him a bit, so I went to him, and said
how I wished he'd teach me the right way o' singing; and he says
I've a rare fine voice, and I go once a week, and take a lesson fra'
him. He's been a grand singer in his day. He's led th' chorusses at
the Festivals, and got thanked many a time by London folk; and one
foreign singer, Madame Catalani, turned round and shook him by th'
hand before the Oud Church [10] full o' people. He says I may gain
ever so much money by singing; but I don't know. Any rate it's sad
work, being blind."


   [Footnote 10: "Old Church;" now the Cathedral of Manchester.]


She took up her sewing, saying her eyes were rested now, and for some
time they sewed on in silence.

Suddenly there were steps heard in the little paved court; person
after person ran past the curtained window.

"Something's up," said Mary. She went to the door and stopping the
first person she saw, inquired the cause of the commotion.

"Eh, wench! donna ye see the fire-light? Carsons' mill is blazing
away like fun;" and away her informant ran.

"Come, Margaret, on wi' your bonnet, and let's go to see Carsons'
mill; it's afire, and they say a burning mill is such a grand sight.
I never saw one."

"Well, I think it's a fearful sight. Besides I've all this work to
do."

But Mary coaxed in her sweet manner, and with her gentle caresses,
promising to help with the gowns all night long if necessary, nay,
saying she should quite enjoy it.

The truth was, Margaret's secret weighed heavily and painfully on her
mind, and she felt her inability to comfort; besides, she wanted to
change the current of Margaret's thoughts; and in addition to these
unselfish feelings, came the desire she had honestly expressed, of
seeing a factory on fire.

So in two minutes they were ready. At the threshold of the house they
met John Barton, to whom they told their errand.

"Carsons' mill! Ay, there is a mill on fire somewhere, sure enough,
by the light, and it will be a rare blaze, for there's not a drop
o' water to be got. And much Carsons will care, for they're well
insured, and the machines are a' th' oud-fashioned kind. See if they
don't think it a fine thing for themselves. They'll not thank them as
tries to put it out."

He gave way for the impatient girls to pass. Guided by the ruddy
light more than by any exact knowledge of the streets that led to the
mill, they scampered along with bent heads, facing the terrible east
wind as best they might.

Carsons' mill ran lengthways from east to west. Along it went one
of the oldest thoroughfares in Manchester. Indeed all that part of
the town was comparatively old; it was there that the first cotton
mills were built, and the crowded alleys and back streets of the
neighbourhood made a fire there particularly to be dreaded. The
staircase of the mill ascended from the entrance at the western end,
which faced into a wide dingy-looking street, consisting principally
of public-houses, pawn-brokers' shops, rag and bone warehouses,
and dirty provision shops. The other, the east end of the factory,
fronted into a very narrow back street, not twenty feet wide, and
miserably lighted and paved. Right against this end of the factory
were the gable ends of the last house in the principal street--a
house which from its size, its handsome stone facings, and the
attempt at ornament in the front, had probably been once a
gentleman's house; but now the light which streamed from its enlarged
front windows made clear the interior of the splendidly fitted up
room, with its painted walls, its pillared recesses, its gilded and
gorgeous fittings up, its miserable, squalid inmates. It was a gin
palace.

Mary almost wished herself away, so fearful (as Margaret had said)
was the sight when they joined the crowd assembled to witness the
fire. There was a murmur of many voices whenever the roaring of the
flames ceased for an instant. It was easy to perceive the mass were
deeply interested.

"What do they say?" asked Margaret, of a neighbour in the crowd, as
she caught a few words, clear and distinct, from the general murmur.

"There never is anyone in the mill, surely!" exclaimed Mary, as the
sea of upward-turned faces moved with one accord to the eastern end,
looking into Dunham Street, the narrow back lane already mentioned.

The western end of the mill, whither the raging flames were driven
by the wind, was crowned and turreted with triumphant fire. It sent
forth its infernal tongues from every window hole, licking the black
walls with amorous fierceness; it was swayed or fell before the
mighty gale, only to rise higher and yet higher, to ravage and roar
yet more wildly. This part of the roof fell in with an astounding
crash, while the crowd struggled more and more to press into Dunham
Street, for what were magnificent terrible flames, what were falling
timbers or tottering walls, in comparison with human life?

There, where the devouring flames had been repelled by the yet more
powerful wind, but where yet black smoke gushed out from every
aperture, there, at one of the windows on the fourth story, or
rather a doorway where a crane was fixed to hoist up goods, might
occasionally be seen, when the thick gusts of smoke cleared partially
away for an instant, the imploring figures of two men. They had
remained after the rest of the workmen for some reason or other, and,
owing to the wind having driven the fire in the opposite direction,
had perceived no sight or sound of alarm, till long after (if any
thing could be called long in that throng of terrors which passed by
in less time than half an hour) the fire had consumed the old wooden
staircase at the other end of the building. I am not sure whether it
was not the first sound of the rushing crowd below that made them
fully aware of their awful position.

"Where are the engines?" asked Margaret of her neighbour.

"They're coming, no doubt; but, bless you, I think it's bare ten
minutes since we first found out th' fire; it rages so wi' this wind,
and all so dry-like."

"Is no one gone for a ladder?" gasped Mary, as the men were
perceptibly, though not audibly, praying the great multitude below
for help.

"Ay, Wilson's son and another man were off like a shot, well nigh
five minute agone. But th' masons, and slaters, and such like, have
left their work, and locked up the yards."

Wilson! then, was that man whose figure loomed out against the ever
increasing dull hot light behind, whenever the smoke was clear,--was
that George Wilson? Mary sickened with terror. She knew he worked for
Carsons; but at first she had had no idea any lives were in danger;
and since she had become aware of this, the heated air, the roaring
flames, the dizzy light, and the agitated and murmuring crowd, had
bewildered her thoughts.

"Oh! let us go home, Margaret; I cannot stay."

"We cannot go! See how we are wedged in by folks. Poor Mary! ye won't
hanker after a fire again. Hark! listen!"

For through the hushed crowd, pressing round the angle of the mill,
and filling up Dunham Street, might be heard the rattle of the
engine, the heavy, quick tread of loaded horses.

"Thank God!" said Margaret's neighbour, "the engine's come."

Another pause; the plugs were stiff, and water could not be got.

Then there was a pressure through the crowd, the front rows bearing
back on those behind, till the girls were sick with the close ramming
confinement. Then a relaxation, and a breathing freely once more.

"'Twas young Wilson and a fireman wi' a ladder," said Margaret's
neighbour, a tall man who could overlook the crowd.

"Oh, tell us what you see?" begged Mary.

"They've gotten it fixed again the gin-shop wall. One o' the men i'
th' factory has fell back; dazed wi' the smoke, I'll warrant. The
floor's not given way there. God!" said he, bringing his eye lower
down, "th' ladder's too short! It's a' over wi' them, poor chaps. Th'
fire's coming slow and sure to that end, and afore they've either
gotten water, or another ladder, they'll be dead out and out. Lord
have mercy on them!"

A sob, as if of excited women, was heard in the hush of the crowd.
Another pressure like the former! Mary clung to Margaret's arm with
a pinching grasp, and longed to faint, and be insensible, to escape
from the oppressing misery of her sensations. A minute or two.

"They've taken th' ladder into th' Temple of Apollor. Can't press
back with it to the yard it came from."

A mighty shout arose; a sound to wake the dead. Up on high, quivering
in the air, was seen the end of the ladder, protruding out of a
garret window, in the gable end of the gin palace, nearly opposite to
the doorway where the men had been seen. Those in the crowd nearest
the factory, and consequently best able to see up to the garret
window, said that several men were holding one end, and guiding by
their weight its passage to the door-way. The garret window-frame had
been taken out before the crowd below were aware of the attempt.

At length--for it seemed long, measured by beating hearts, though
scarce two minutes had elapsed--the ladder was fixed, an aerial
bridge at a dizzy height, across the narrow street.

Every eye was fixed in unwinking anxiety, and people's very breathing
seemed stilled in suspense. The men were nowhere to be seen, but the
wind appeared, for the moment, higher than ever, and drove back the
invading flames to the other end.

Mary and Margaret could see now; right above them danced the ladder
in the wind. The crowd pressed back from under; firemen's helmets
appeared at the window, holding the ladder firm, when a man, with
quick, steady tread, and unmoving head, passed from one side to
the other. The multitude did not even whisper while he crossed the
perilous bridge, which quivered under him; but when he was across,
safe comparatively in the factory, a cheer arose for an instant,
checked, however, almost immediately, by the uncertainty of the
result, and the desire not in any way to shake the nerves of the
brave fellow who had cast his life on such a die.

"There he is again!" sprung to the lips of many, as they saw him at
the doorway, standing as if for an instant to breathe a mouthful of
the fresher air, before he trusted himself to cross. On his shoulders
he bore an insensible body.

"It's Jem Wilson and his father," whispered Margaret; but Mary knew
it before.

The people were sick with anxious terror. He could no longer balance
himself with his arms; every thing must depend on nerve and eye. They
saw the latter was fixed, by the position of the head, which never
wavered; the ladder shook under the double weight; but still he never
moved his head--he dared not look below. It seemed an age before the
crossing was accomplished. At last the window was gained; the bearer
relieved from his burden; both had disappeared.

Then the multitude might shout; and above the roaring flames, louder
than the blowing of the mighty wind, arose that tremendous burst of
applause at the success of the daring enterprise. Then a shrill cry
was heard, asking

"Is the oud man alive, and likely to do?"

"Ay," answered one of the firemen to the hushed crowd below. "He's
coming round finely, now he's had a dash of cowd water."

He drew back his head; and the eager inquiries, the shouts, the
sea-like murmurs of the moving rolling mass began again to be
heard--but for an instant though. In far less time than even that in
which I have endeavoured briefly to describe the pause of events, the
same bold hero stepped again upon the ladder, with evident purpose to
rescue the man yet remaining in the burning mill.

He went across in the same quick steady manner as before, and the
people below, made less acutely anxious by his previous success, were
talking to each other, shouting out intelligence of the progress of
the fire at the other end of the factory, telling of the endeavours
of the firemen at that part to obtain water, while the closely packed
body of men heaved and rolled from side to side. It was different
from the former silent breathless hush. I do not know if it were from
this cause, or from the recollection of peril past, or that he looked
below, in the breathing moment before returning with the remaining
person (a slight little man) slung across his shoulders, but Jem
Wilson's step was less steady, his tread more uncertain; he seemed to
feel with his foot for the next round of the ladder, to waver, and
finally to stop half-way. By this time the crowd was still enough;
in the awful instant that intervened no one durst speak, even to
encourage. Many turned sick with terror, and shut their eyes to avoid
seeing the catastrophe they dreaded. It came. The brave man swayed
from side to side, at first as slightly as if only balancing himself;
but he was evidently losing nerve, and even sense: it was only
wonderful how the animal instinct of self-preservation did not
overcome every generous feeling, and impel him at once to drop the
helpless, inanimate body he carried; perhaps the same instinct told
him, that the sudden loss of so heavy a weight would of itself be a
great and imminent danger.

"Help me! she's fainted," cried Margaret. But no one heeded. All eyes
were directed upwards. At this point of time a rope, with a running
noose, was dexterously thrown by one of the firemen, after the manner
of a lasso, over the head and round the bodies of the two men. True,
it was with rude and slight adjustment: but, slight as it was, it
served as a steadying guide; it encouraged the sinking heart, the
dizzy head. Once more Jem stepped onwards. He was not hurried by any
jerk or pull. Slowly and gradually the rope was hauled in, slowly and
gradually did he make the four or five paces between him and safety.
The window was gained, and all were saved. The multitude in the
street absolutely danced with triumph, and huzzaed and yelled till
you would have fancied their very throats would crack; and then with
all the fickleness of interest characteristic of a large body of
people, pressed and stumbled, and cursed and swore in the hurry to
get out of Dunham Street, and back to the immediate scene of the
fire, the mighty diapason of whose roaring flames formed an awful
accompaniment to the screams, and yells, and imprecations, of the
struggling crowd.

As they pressed away, Margaret was left, pale and almost sinking
under the weight of Mary's body, which she had preserved in an
upright position by keeping her arms tight round Mary's waist,
dreading, with reason, the trampling of unheeding feet.

Now, however, she gently let her down on the cold clean pavement; and
the change of posture, and the difference in temperature, now that
the people had withdrawn from their close neighbourhood, speedily
restored her to consciousness.

Her first glance was bewildered and uncertain. She had forgotten
where she was. Her cold, hard bed felt strange; the murky glare in
the sky affrighted her. She shut her eyes to think, to recollect.

Her next look was upwards. The fearful bridge had been withdrawn; the
window was unoccupied.

"They are safe," said Margaret.

"All? Are all safe, Margaret?" asked Mary.

"Ask yon fireman, and he'll tell you more about it than I can. But I
know they're all safe."

The fireman hastily corroborated Margaret's words.

"Why did you let Jem Wilson go twice?" asked Margaret.

"Let!--why we could not hinder him. As soon as ever he'd heard his
father speak (which he was na long a doing), Jem were off like a
shot; only saying he knowed better nor us where to find t'other man.
We'd all ha' gone, if he had na been in such a hurry, for no one can
say as Manchester firemen is ever backward when there's danger."

So saying, he ran off; and the two girls, without remark or
discussion, turned homewards. They were overtaken by the elder
Wilson, pale, grimy, and blear-eyed, but apparently as strong and
well as ever. He loitered a minute or two alongside of them, giving
an account of his detention in the mill; he then hastily wished
good-night, saying he must go home and tell his missis he was all
safe and well: but after he had gone a few steps, he turned back,
came on Mary's side of the pavement, and in an earnest whisper, which
Margaret could not avoid hearing, he said,

"Mary, if my boy comes across you to-night, give him a kind word or
two for my sake. Do! bless you, there's a good wench."

Mary hung her head and answered not a word, and in an instant he was
gone.

When they arrived at home, they found John Barton smoking his pipe,
unwilling to question, yet very willing to hear all the details
they could give him. Margaret went over the whole story, and it was
amusing to watch his gradually increasing interest and excitement.
First, the regular puffing abated, then ceased. Then the pipe was
fairly taken out of his mouth, and held suspended. Then he rose, and
at every further point he came a step nearer to the narrator.

When it was ended, he swore (an unusual thing for him) that if Jem
Wilson wanted Mary he should have her to-morrow, if he had not a
penny to keep her.

Margaret laughed, but Mary, who was now recovered from her agitation,
pouted, and looked angry.

The work which they had left was resumed: but with full hearts,
fingers never go very quickly; and I am sorry to say, that owing to
the fire, the two younger Miss Ogdens were in such grief for the loss
of their excellent father, that they were unable to appear before the
little circle of sympathising friends gathered together to comfort
the widow, and see the funeral set off.




CHAPTER VI.

POVERTY AND DEATH.


   "How little can the rich man know
     Of what the poor man feels,
   When Want, like some dark dæmon foe,
     Nearer and nearer steals!

   _He_ never tramp'd the weary round,
     A stroke of work to gain,
   And sicken'd at the dreaded sound
     Telling him 'twas in vain.

   Foot-sore, heart-sore, _he_ never came
     Back through the winter's wind,
   To a dark cellar, there no flame,
     No light, no food, to find.

   _He_ never saw his darlings lie
     Shivering, the flags their bed;
   _He_ never heard that maddening cry,
     'Daddy, a bit of bread!'"

   MANCHESTER SONG.


John Barton was not far wrong in his idea that the Messrs. Carson
would not be over much grieved for the consequences of the fire
in their mill. They were well insured; the machinery lacked the
improvements of late years, and worked but poorly in comparison with
that which might now be procured. Above all, trade was very slack;
cottons could find no market, and goods lay packed and piled in many
a warehouse. The mills were merely worked to keep the machinery,
human and metal, in some kind of order and readiness for better
times. So this was an excellent opportunity, Messrs. Carson thought,
for refitting their factory with first-rate improvements, for which
the insurance money would amply pay. They were in no hurry about
the business, however. The weekly drain of wages given for labour,
useless in the present state of the market, was stopped. The partners
had more leisure than they had known for years; and promised wives
and daughters all manner of pleasant excursions, as soon as the
weather should become more genial. It was a pleasant thing to be
able to lounge over breakfast with a review or newspaper in hand; to
have time for becoming acquainted with agreeable and accomplished
daughters, on whose education no money had been spared, but whose
fathers, shut up during a long day with calicoes and accounts, had
so seldom had leisure to enjoy their daughters' talents. There were
happy family evenings, now that the men of business had time for
domestic enjoyments. There is another side to the picture. There were
homes over which Carsons' fire threw a deep, terrible gloom; the
homes of those who would fain work, and no man gave unto them--the
homes of those to whom leisure was a curse. There, the family music
was hungry wails, when week after week passed by, and there was no
work to be had, and consequently no wages to pay for the bread the
children cried aloud for in their young impatience of suffering.
There was no breakfast to lounge over; their lounge was taken in bed,
to try and keep warmth in them that bitter March weather, and, by
being quiet, to deaden the gnawing wolf within. Many a penny that
would have gone little way enough in oatmeal or potatoes, bought
opium to still the hungry little ones, and make them forget their
uneasiness in heavy troubled sleep. It was mother's mercy. The
evil and the good of our nature came out strongly then. There were
desperate fathers; there were bitter-tongued mothers (O God! what
wonder!); there were reckless children; the very closest bonds of
nature were snapt in that time of trial and distress. There was Faith
such as the rich can never imagine on earth; there was "Love strong
as death;" and self-denial, among rude, coarse men, akin to that
of Sir Philip Sidney's most glorious deed. The vices of the poor
sometimes astound us _here_; but when the secrets of all hearts shall
be made known, their virtues will astound us in far greater degree.
Of this I am certain.

As the cold bleak spring came on (spring, in name alone), and
consequently as trade continued dead, other mills shortened hours,
turned off hands, and finally stopped work altogether.

Barton worked short hours; Wilson, of course, being a hand in
Carsons' factory, had no work at all. But his son, working at an
engineer's, and a steady man, obtained wages enough to maintain all
the family in a careful way. Still it preyed on Wilson's mind to be
so long indebted to his son. He was out of spirits and depressed.
Barton was morose, and soured towards mankind as a body, and the
rich in particular. One evening, when the clear light at six o'clock
contrasted strangely with the Christmas cold, and when the bitter
wind piped down every entry, and through every cranny, Barton sat
brooding over his stinted fire, and listening for Mary's step, in
unacknowledged trust that her presence would cheer him. The door was
opened, and Wilson came breathless in.

"You've not got a bit o' money by you, Barton?" asked he.

"Not I; who has now, I'd like to know. Whatten you want it for?"

"I donnot [11] want it for mysel, tho' we've none to spare. But don
ye know Ben Davenport as worked at Carsons'? He's down wi' the fever,
and ne'er a stick o' fire, nor a cowd [12] potato in the house."


   [Footnote 11: "Don" is constantly used in Lancashire for "do;"
                 as it was by our older writers. "And that may
                 non Hors _don_."--_Sir J. Mondeville._ "But for
                 th' entent to _don_ this sinne."--_Chaucer._]

   [Footnote 12: "Cowd," cold. Teut., _kaud_. Dutch, _koud_.]


"I han got no money, I tell ye," said Barton. Wilson looked
disappointed. Barton tried not to be interested, but he could not
help it in spite of his gruffness. He rose, and went to the cupboard
(his wife's pride long ago). There lay the remains of his dinner,
hastily put by ready for supper. Bread, and a slice of cold fat
boiled bacon. He wrapped them in his handkerchief, put them in the
crown of his hat, and said--"Come, let's be going."

"Going--art thou going to work this time o' day?"

"No, stupid, to be sure not. Going to see the fellow thou spoke
on." So they put on their hats and set out. On the way Wilson said
Davenport was a good fellow, though too much of the Methodee; that
his children were too young to work, but not too young to be cold and
hungry; that they had sunk lower and lower, and pawned thing after
thing, and that now they lived in a cellar in Berry Street, off Store
Street. Barton growled inarticulate words of no benevolent import to
a large class of mankind, and so they went along till they arrived
in Berry Street. It was unpaved; and down the middle a gutter forced
its way, every now and then forming pools in the holes with which the
street abounded. Never was the Old Edinburgh cry of "Gardez l'eau"
more necessary than in this street. As they passed, women from their
doors tossed household slops of _every_ description into the gutter;
they ran into the next pool, which overflowed and stagnated. Heaps of
ashes were the stepping-stones, on which the passer-by, who cared in
the least for cleanliness, took care not to put his foot. Our friends
were not dainty, but even they picked their way till they got to some
steps leading down into a small area, where a person standing would
have his head about one foot below the level of the street, and
might at the same time, without the least motion of his body, touch
the window of the cellar and the damp muddy wall right opposite.
You went down one step even from the foul area into the cellar in
which a family of human beings lived. It was very dark inside. The
window-panes were, many of them, broken and stuffed with rags, which
was reason enough for the dusky light that pervaded the place even at
mid-day. After the account I have given of the state of the street,
no one can be surprised that on going into the cellar inhabited by
Davenport, the smell was so foetid as almost to knock the two men
down. Quickly recovering themselves, as those inured to such things
do, they began to penetrate the thick darkness of the place, and to
see three or four little children rolling on the damp, nay wet, brick
floor, through which the stagnant, filthy moisture of the street
oozed up; the fire-place was empty and black; the wife sat on her
husband's lair, and cried in the dank loneliness.

"See, missis, I'm back again.--Hold your noise, children, and don't
mither [13] your mammy for bread; here's a chap as has got some for
you."


   [Footnote 13: "Mither," to trouble and perplex. "I'm welly
                 mithered"--I'm well nigh crazed.]


In that dim light, which was darkness to strangers, they clustered
round Barton, and tore from him the food he had brought with him. It
was a large hunch of bread, but it vanished in an instant.

"We mun do summut for 'em," said he to Wilson. "Yo stop here, and
I'll be back in half-an-hour."

So he strode, and ran, and hurried home. He emptied into the
ever-useful pocket-handkerchief the little meal remaining in the mug.
Mary would have her tea at Miss Simmonds'; her food for the day was
safe. Then he went up-stairs for his better coat, and his one, gay,
red-and-yellow silk pocket-handkerchief--his jewels, his plate, his
valuables, these were. He went to the pawn-shop; he pawned them for
five shillings; he stopped not, nor stayed, till he was once more
in London Road, within five minutes' walk of Berry Street--then he
loitered in his gait, in order to discover the shops he wanted. He
bought meat, and a loaf of bread, candles, chips, and from a little
retail yard he purchased a couple of hundredweights of coals. Some
money yet remained--all destined for them, but he did not yet know
how best to spend it. Food, light, and warmth, he had instantly seen
were necessary; for luxuries he would wait. Wilson's eyes filled with
tears when he saw Barton enter with his purchases. He understood
it all, and longed to be once more in work, that he might help in
some of these material ways, without feeling that he was using his
son's money. But though "silver and gold he had none," he gave
heart-service and love works of far more value. Nor was John Barton
behind in these. "The fever" was (as it usually is in Manchester) of
a low, putrid, typhoid kind; brought on by miserable living, filthy
neighbourhood, and great depression of mind and body. It is virulent,
malignant, and highly infectious. But the poor are fatalists with
regard to infection; and well for them it is so, for in their crowded
dwellings no invalid can be isolated. Wilson asked Barton if he
thought he should catch it, and was laughed at for his idea.

The two men, rough, tender nurses as they were, lighted the fire,
which smoked and puffed into the room as if it did not know the way
up the damp, unused chimney. The very smoke seemed purifying and
healthy in the thick clammy air. The children clamoured again for
bread; but this time Barton took a piece first to the poor, helpless,
hopeless woman, who still sat by the side of her husband, listening
to his anxious miserable mutterings. She took the bread, when it was
put into her hand, and broke a bit, but could not eat. She was past
hunger. She fell down on the floor with a heavy unresisting bang. The
men looked puzzled. "She's well-nigh clemmed," said Barton. "Folk
do say one mustn't give clemmed people much to eat; but, bless us,
she'll eat nought."

"I'll tell yo what I'll do," said Wilson. "I'll take these two big
lads, as does nought but fight, home to my missis's for to-night,
and I'll get a jug o' tea. Them women always does best with tea and
such-like slop."

So Barton was now left alone with a little child, crying (when it had
done eating) for mammy; with a fainting, dead-like woman; and with
the sick man, whose mutterings were rising up to screams and shrieks
of agonised anxiety. He carried the woman to the fire, and chafed her
hands. He looked around for something to raise her head. There was
literally nothing but some loose bricks. However, those he got; and
taking off his coat he covered them with it as well as he could. He
pulled her feet to the fire, which now began to emit some faint heat.
He looked round for water, but the poor woman had been too weak to
drag herself out to the distant pump, and water there was none. He
snatched the child, and ran up the area-steps to the room above, and
borrowed their only saucepan with some water in it. Then he began,
with the useful skill of a working-man, to make some gruel; and when
it was hastily made he seized a battered iron table-spoon (kept when
many other little things had been sold in a lot), in order to feed
baby, and with it he forced one or two drops between her clenched
teeth. The mouth opened mechanically to receive more, and gradually
she revived. She sat up and looked round; and recollecting all, fell
down again in weak and passive despair. Her little child crawled to
her, and wiped with its fingers the thick-coming tears which she
now had strength to weep. It was now high time to attend to the man.
He lay on straw, so damp and mouldy no dog would have chosen it in
preference to flags; over it was a piece of sacking, coming next to
his worn skeleton of a body; above him was mustered every article
of clothing that could be spared by mother or children this bitter
weather; and in addition to his own, these might have given as much
warmth as one blanket, could they have been kept on him; but as he
restlessly tossed to and fro, they fell off and left him shivering in
spite of the burning heat of his skin. Every now and then he started
up in his naked madness, looking like the prophet of woe in the
fearful plague-picture; but he soon fell again in exhaustion, and
Barton found he must be closely watched, lest in these falls he
should injure himself against the hard brick floor. He was thankful
when Wilson re-appeared, carrying in both hands a jug of steaming
tea, intended for the poor wife; but when the delirious husband saw
drink, he snatched at it with animal instinct, with a selfishness he
had never shown in health.

Then the two men consulted together. It seemed decided, without a
word being spoken on the subject, that both should spend the night
with the forlorn couple; that was settled. But could no doctor be
had? In all probability, no; the next day an infirmary order might be
begged, but meanwhile the only medical advice they could have must be
from a druggist's. So Barton (being the moneyed man) set out to find
a shop in London Road.

It is a pretty sight to walk through a street with lighted shops; the
gas is so brilliant, the display of goods so much more vividly shown
than by day, and of all shops a druggist's looks the most like the
tales of our childhood, from Aladdin's garden of enchanted fruits
to the charming Rosamond with her purple jar. No such associations
had Barton; yet he felt the contrast between the well-filled,
well-lighted shops and the dim gloomy cellar, and it made him moody
that such contrasts should exist. They are the mysterious problem of
life to more than him. He wondered if any in all the hurrying crowd
had come from such a house of mourning. He thought they all looked
joyous, and he was angry with them. But he could not, you cannot,
read the lot of those who daily pass you by in the street. How do you
know the wild romances of their lives; the trials, the temptations
they are even now enduring, resisting, sinking under? You may be
elbowed one instant by the girl desperate in her abandonment,
laughing in mad merriment with her outward gesture, while her soul
is longing for the rest of the dead, and bringing itself to think
of the cold-flowing river as the only mercy of God remaining to her
here. You may pass the criminal, meditating crimes at which you will
to-morrow shudder with horror as you read them. You may push against
one, humble and unnoticed, the last upon earth, who in Heaven will
for ever be in the immediate light of God's countenance. Errands of
mercy--errands of sin--did you ever think where all the thousands of
people you daily meet are bound? Barton's was an errand of mercy; but
the thoughts of his heart were touched by sin, by bitter hatred of
the happy, whom he, for the time, confounded with the selfish.

He reached a druggist's shop, and entered. The druggist (whose smooth
manners seemed to have been salved over with his own spermaceti)
listened attentively to Barton's description of Davenport's illness;
concluded it was typhus fever, very prevalent in that neighbourhood;
and proceeded to make up a bottle of medicine, sweet spirits of
nitre, or some such innocent potion, very good for slight colds, but
utterly powerless to stop, for an instant, the raging fever of the
poor man it was intended to relieve. He recommended the same course
they had previously determined to adopt, applying the next morning
for an infirmary order; and Barton left the shop with comfortable
faith in the physic given him; for men of his class, if they
believe in physic at all, believe that every description is equally
efficacious.

Meanwhile, Wilson had done what he could at Davenport's home. He
had soothed, and covered the man many a time; he had fed and hushed
the little child, and spoken tenderly to the woman, who lay still
in her weakness and her weariness. He had opened a door, but only
for an instant; it led into a back cellar, with a grating instead
of a window, down which dropped the moisture from pigsties, and
worse abominations. It was not paved; the floor was one mass of bad
smelling mud. It had never been used, for there was not an article of
furniture in it; nor could a human being, much less a pig, have lived
there many days. Yet the "back apartment" made a difference in the
rent. The Davenports paid threepence more for having two rooms. When
he turned round again, he saw the woman suckling the child from her
dry, withered breast.

"Surely the lad is weaned!" exclaimed he, in surprise. "Why, how old
is he?"

"Going on two year," she faintly answered. "But, oh! it keeps him
quiet when I've nought else to gi' him, and he'll get a bit of sleep
lying there, if he's getten [14] nought beside. We han done our best
to gi' the childer [15] food, howe'er we pinched ourselves."


   [Footnote 14: "For he had _geten_ him yet no benefice."--_Prologue
                 to Canterbury Tales._]

   [Footnote 15: Wicklife uses "_childre_" in his Apology, page 26.]


"Han [16] ye had no money fra th' town?"


   [Footnote 16: "What concord _han_ light and dark."--_Spenser._]


"No; my master is Buckinghamshire born; and he's feared the town
would send him back to his parish, if he went to th' board; so we've
just borne on in hope o' better times. But I think they'll never come
in my day;" and the poor woman began her weak high-pitched cry again.

"Here, sup [17] this drop o' gruel, and then try and get a bit o'
sleep. John and I'll watch by your master to-night."


   [Footnote 17: "And thay _soupe_ the brothe thereof."--_Sir J.
                 Mandeville._]


"God's blessing be on you!"

She finished the gruel, and fell into a deep sleep. Wilson covered
her with his coat as well as he could, and tried to move lightly
for fear of disturbing her; but there need have been no such dread,
for her sleep was profound and heavy with exhaustion. Once only she
roused to pull the coat round her little child.

And now all Wilson's care, and Barton's to boot, was wanted to
restrain the wild mad agony of the fevered man. He started up, he
yelled, he seemed infuriated by overwhelming anxiety. He cursed and
swore, which surprised Wilson, who knew his piety in health, and who
did not know the unbridled tongue of delirium. At length he seemed
exhausted, and fell asleep; and Barton and Wilson drew near the fire,
and talked together in whispers. They sat on the floor, for chairs
there were none; the sole table was an old tub turned upside-down.
They put out the candle and conversed by the flickering fire-light.

"Han yo known this chap long?" asked Barton.

"Better nor three year. He's worked wi' Carsons that long, and
were alway a steady, civil-spoken fellow, though, as I said afore,
somewhat of a Methodee. I wish I'd gotten a letter he sent his
missis, a week or two agone, when he were on tramp for work. It did
my heart good to read it; for, yo see, I were a bit grumbling mysel;
it seemed hard to be spunging on Jem, and taking a' his flesh-meat
money to buy bread for me and them as I ought to be keeping. But, yo
know, though I can earn nought, I mun eat summut. Well, as I telled
ye, I were grumbling, when she (indicating the sleeping woman by a
nod) brought me Ben's letter, for she could na read hersel. It were
as good as Bible-words; ne'er a word o' repining; a' about God being
our Father, and that we mun bear patiently whate'er He sends."

"Don ye think He's th' masters' Father, too? I'd be loath to have 'em
for brothers."

"Eh, John! donna talk so; sure there's many and many a master as good
or better nor us."

"If you think so, tell me this. How comes it they're rich, and we're
poor? I'd like to know that. Han they done as they'd be done by for
us?"

But Wilson was no arguer; no speechifier as he would have called it.
So Barton, seeing he was likely to have it his own way, went on.

"You'll say (at least many a one does), they'n [18] getten capital
an' we'n getten none. I say, our labour's our capital and we ought
to draw interest on that. They get interest on their capital somehow
a' this time, while ourn is lying idle, else how could they all live
as they do? Besides, there's many on 'em as had nought to begin wi';
there's Carsons, and Duncombes, and Mengies, and many another, as
comed into Manchester with clothes to their back, and that were all,
and now they're worth their tens of thousands, a' getten out of
our labour; why the very land as fetched but sixty pound twenty
year agone is now worth six hundred, and that, too, is owing to
our labour: but look at yo, and see me, and poor Davenport yonder;
whatten better are we? They'n screwed us down to th' lowest peg, in
order to make their great big fortunes, and build their great big
houses, and we, why we're just clemming, many and many of us. Can you
say there's nought wrong in this?"


   [Footnote 18: "They'n," contraction of "they han," they have.]


"Well, Barton, I'll not gainsay ye. But Mr. Carson spoke to me after
th' fire, and says he, 'I shall ha' to retrench, and be very careful
in my expenditure during these bad times, I assure ye;' so yo see th'
masters suffer too."

"Han they ever seen a child o' their'n die for want o' food?" asked
Barton, in a low, deep voice.

"I donnot mean," continued he, "to say as I'm so badly off. I'd
scorn to speak for mysel; but when I see such men as Davenport there
dying away, for very clemming, I cannot stand it. I've but gotten
Mary, and she keeps hersel pretty much. I think we'll ha' to give up
house-keeping; but that I donnot mind."

And in this kind of talk the night, the long heavy night of watching,
wore away. As far as they could judge, Davenport continued in the
same state, although the symptoms varied occasionally. The wife slept
on, only roused by a cry of her child now and then, which seemed to
have power over her, when far louder noises failed to disturb her.
The watchers agreed, that as soon as it was likely Mr. Carson would
be up and visible, Wilson should go to his house, and beg for an
Infirmary order. At length the gray dawn penetrated even into the
dark cellar. Davenport slept, and Barton was to remain there until
Wilson's return; so stepping out into the fresh air, brisk and
reviving, even in that street of abominations, Wilson took his way to
Mr. Carson's.

Wilson had about two miles to walk before he reached Mr. Carson's
house, which was almost in the country. The streets were not yet
bustling and busy. The shopmen were lazily taking down the shutters,
although it was near eight o'clock; for the day was long enough for
the purchases people made in that quarter of the town, while trade
was so flat. One or two miserable-looking women were setting off on
their day's begging expedition. But there were few people abroad. Mr.
Carson's was a good house, and furnished with disregard to expense.
But in addition to lavish expenditure, there was much taste shown,
and many articles chosen for their beauty and elegance adorned
his rooms. As Wilson passed a window which a housemaid had thrown
open, he saw pictures and gilding, at which he was tempted to stop
and look; but then he thought it would not be respectful. So he
hastened on to the kitchen door. The servants seemed very busy with
preparations for breakfast; but good-naturedly, though hastily,
told him to step in, and they could soon let Mr. Carson know he was
there. So he was ushered into a kitchen hung round with glittering
tins, where a roaring fire burnt merrily, and where numbers of
utensils hung round, at whose nature and use Wilson amused himself
by guessing. Meanwhile, the servants bustled to and fro; an out-door
man-servant came in for orders, and sat down near Wilson; the cook
broiled steaks, and the kitchen-maid toasted bread, and boiled eggs.

The coffee steamed upon the fire, and altogether the odours were so
mixed and appetising, that Wilson began to yearn for food to break
his fast, which had lasted since dinner the day before. If the
servants had known this, they would have willingly given him meat
and bread in abundance; but they were like the rest of us, and not
feeling hunger themselves, forgot it was possible another might. So
Wilson's craving turned to sickness, while they chattered on, making
the kitchen's free and keen remarks upon the parlour.

"How late you were last night, Thomas!"

"Yes, I was right weary of waiting; they told me to be at the rooms
by twelve; and there I was. But it was two o'clock before they called
me."

"And did you wait all that time in the street?" asked the housemaid,
who had done her work for the present, and come into the kitchen for
a bit of gossip.

"My eye as like! you don't think I'm such a fool as to catch my death
of cold, and let the horses catch their death too, as we should ha'
done if we'd stopped there. No! I put th' horses up in th' stables at
th' Spread Eagle, and went mysel, and got a glass or two by th' fire.
They're driving a good custom, them, wi' coachmen. There were five on
us, and we'd many a quart o' ale, and gin wi' it, to keep out cold."

"Mercy on us, Thomas; you'll get a drunkard at last!"

"If I do, I know whose blame it will be. It will be missis's, and
not mine. Flesh and blood can't sit to be starved to death on a
coach-box, waiting for folks as don't know their own mind."

A servant, semi-upper-housemaid, semi-lady's-maid, now came down with
orders from her mistress.

"Thomas, you must ride to the fishmonger's, and say missis can't give
above half-a-crown a pound for salmon for Tuesday; she's grumbling
because trade's so bad. And she'll want the carriage at three to go
to the lecture, Thomas; at the Royal Execution, you know."

"Ay, ay, I know."

"And you'd better all of you mind your P's and Q's, for she's very
black this morning. She's got a bad headache."

"It's a pity Miss Jenkins is not here to match her. Lord! how she and
missis did quarrel which had got the worst headaches; it was that
Miss Jenkins left for; she would not give up having bad headaches,
and missis could not abide any one to have 'em but herself."

"Missis will have her breakfast up-stairs, cook, and the cold
partridge as was left yesterday, and put plenty of cream in her
coffee, and she thinks there's a roll left, and she would like it
well buttered."

So saying, the maid left the kitchen to be ready to attend to the
young ladies' bell when they chose to ring, after their late assembly
the night before.

In the luxurious library, at the well-spread breakfast-table, sat
the two Mr. Carsons, father and son. Both were reading; the father
a newspaper, the son a review, while they lazily enjoyed their
nicely prepared food. The father was a prepossessing-looking old
man; perhaps self-indulgent you might guess. The son was strikingly
handsome, and knew it. His dress was neat and well appointed, and his
manners far more gentlemanly than his father's. He was the only son,
and his sisters were proud of him; his father and mother were proud
of him: he could not set up his judgment against theirs; he was proud
of himself.

The door opened and in bounded Amy, the sweet youngest daughter of
the house, a lovely girl of sixteen, fresh and glowing, and bright
as a rosebud. She was too young to go to assemblies, at which her
father rejoiced, for he had little Amy with her pretty jokes, and her
bird-like songs, and her playful caresses all the evening to amuse
him in his loneliness; and she was not too much tired, like Sophy and
Helen, to give him her sweet company at breakfast the next morning.

He submitted willingly while she blinded him with her hands, and
kissed his rough red face all over. She took his newspaper away after
a little pretended resistance, and would not allow her brother Harry
to go on with his review.

"I'm the only lady this morning, papa, so you know you must make a
great deal of me."

"My darling, I think you have your own way always, whether you're the
only lady or not."

"Yes, papa, you're pretty good and obedient, I must say that; but I'm
sorry to say Harry is very naughty, and does not do what I tell him;
do you, Harry?"

"I'm sure I don't know what you mean to accuse me of, Amy; I expected
praise and not blame; for did not I get you that eau de Portugal from
town, that you could not meet with at Hughes', you little ungrateful
puss?"

"Did you! Oh, sweet Harry; you're as sweet as eau de Portugal
yourself; you're almost as good as papa; but still you know you did
go and forget to ask Bigland for that rose, that new rose they say he
has got."

"No, Amy, I did not forget. I asked him, and he has got the Rose,
_sans reproche_; but do you know, little Miss Extravagance, a very
small one is half-a-guinea?"

"Oh, I don't mind. Papa will give it me, won't you, dear father? He
knows his little daughter can't live without flowers and scents."

Mr. Carson tried to refuse his darling, but she coaxed him into
acquiescence, saying she must have it, it was one of her necessaries.
Life was not worth having without flowers.

"Then, Amy," said her brother, "try and be content with peonies and
dandelions."

"Oh, you wretch! I don't call them flowers. Besides, you're every bit
as extravagant. Who gave half-a-crown for a bunch of lilies of the
valley at Yates', a month ago, and then would not let his poor little
sister have them, though she went on her knees to beg them? Answer me
that, Master Hal."

"Not on compulsion," replied her brother, smiling with his mouth,
while his eyes had an irritated expression, and he went first red,
then pale, with vexed embarrassment.

"If you please, sir," said a servant, entering the room, "here's one
of the mill people wanting to see you; his name is Wilson, he says."

"I'll come to him directly; stay, tell him to come in here."

Amy danced off into the conservatory which opened out of the room,
before the gaunt, pale, unwashed, unshaven weaver was ushered in.
There he stood at the door, sleeking his hair with old country habit,
and every now and then stealing a glance round at the splendour of
the apartment.

"Well, Wilson, and what do you want to-day, man?"

"Please, sir, Davenport's ill of the fever, and I'm come to know if
you've got an Infirmary order for him?"

"Davenport--Davenport; who is the fellow? I don't know the name."

"He's worked in your factory better nor three year, sir."

"Very likely; I don't pretend to know the names of the men I employ;
that I leave to the overlooker. So he's ill, eh?"

"Ay, sir, he's very bad; we want to get him in at the fever wards.

"I doubt if I have an in-patient's order to spare; they're always
wanted for accidents, you know. But I'll give you an out-patient's,
and welcome."

So saying, he rose up, unlocked a drawer, pondered a minute, and then
gave Wilson an out-patient's order to be presented the following
Monday. Monday! How many days there were before Monday!

Meanwhile, the younger Mr. Carson had ended his review, and began to
listen to what was going on. He finished his breakfast, got up, and
pulled five shillings out of his pocket, which he gave to Wilson
as he passed him, for the "poor fellow." He went past quickly, and
calling for his horse, mounted gaily, and rode away. He was anxious
to be in time to have a look and a smile from lovely Mary Barton, as
she went to Miss Simmonds'. But to-day he was to be disappointed.
Wilson left the house, not knowing whether to be pleased or grieved.
It was long to Monday, but they had all spoken kindly to him, and who
could tell if they might not remember this, and do something before
Monday. Besides, the cook, who, when she had had time to think, after
breakfast was sent in, had noticed his paleness, had had meat and
bread ready to put in his hand when he came out of the parlour; and a
full stomach makes every one of us more hopeful.

When he reached Berry Street, he had persuaded himself he bore good
news, and felt almost elated in his heart. But it fell when he opened
the cellar-door, and saw Barton and the wife both bending over the
sick man's couch with awe-struck, saddened look.

"Come here," said Barton. "There's a change comed over him sin' yo
left, is there not?"

Wilson looked. The flesh was sunk, the features prominent, bony, and
rigid. The fearful clay-colour of death was over all. But the eyes
were open and sensible, though the films of the grave were settling
upon them.

"He wakened fra his sleep, as yo left him in, and began to mutter and
moan; but he soon went off again, and we never knew he were awake
till he called his wife, but now she's here he's gotten nought to say
to her."

Most probably, as they all felt, he could not speak, for his strength
was fast ebbing. They stood round him still and silent; even the wife
checked her sobs, though her heart was like to break. She held her
child to her breast, to try and keep him quiet. Their eyes were all
fixed on the yet living one, whose moments of life were passing so
rapidly away. At length he brought (with jerking, convulsive effort)
his two hands into the attitude of prayer. They saw his lips move,
and bent to catch the words, which came in gasps, and not in tones.

"Oh Lord God! I thank thee, that the hard struggle of living is
over."

"Oh, Ben! Ben!" wailed forth his wife, "have you no thought for me?
Oh, Ben! Ben! do say one word to help me through life."

He could not speak again. The trump of the archangel would set his
tongue free; but not a word more would it utter till then. Yet he
heard, he understood, and though sight failed, he moved his hand
gropingly over the covering. They knew what he meant, and guided it
to her head, bowed and hidden in her hands, when she had sunk in her
woe. It rested there, with a feeble pressure of endearment. The face
grew beautiful, as the soul neared God. A peace beyond understanding
came over it. The hand was a heavy, stiff weight on the wife's
head. No more grief or sorrow for him. They reverently laid out the
corpse--Wilson fetching his only spare shirt to array it in. The wife
still lay hidden in the clothes, in a stupor of agony.

There was a knock at the door, and Barton went to open it. It
was Mary, who had received a message from her father, through a
neighbour, telling her where he was; and she had set out early to
come and have a word with him before her day's work; but some errands
she had to do for Miss Simmonds had detained her until now.

"Come in, wench!" said her father. "Try if thou canst comfort yon
poor, poor woman, kneeling down there. God help her." Mary did not
know what to say, or how to comfort; but she knelt down by her, and
put her arm round her neck, and in a little while fell to crying
herself so bitterly, that the source of tears was opened by sympathy
in the widow, and her full heart was, for a time, relieved.

And Mary forgot all purposed meeting with her gay lover, Harry
Carson; forgot Miss Simmonds' errands, and her anger, in the anxious
desire to comfort the poor lone woman. Never had her sweet face
looked more angelic, never had her gentle voice seemed so musical as
when she murmured her broken sentences of comfort.

"Oh, don't cry so, dear Mrs. Davenport, pray don't take on so. Sure
he's gone where he'll never know care again. Yes, I know how lonesome
you must feel; but think of your children. Oh! we'll all help to earn
food for 'em. Think how sorry _he'd_ be, if he sees you fretting so.
Don't cry so, please don't."

And she ended by crying herself, as passionately as the poor widow.

It was agreed that the town must bury him; he had paid to a burial
club as long as he could; but by a few weeks' omission, he had
forfeited his claim to a sum of money now. Would Mrs. Davenport and
the little child go home with Mary? The latter brightened up as she
urged this plan; but no! where the poor, fondly loved remains were,
there would the mourner be; and all that they could do was to make
her as comfortable as their funds would allow, and to beg a neighbour
to look in and say a word at times. So she was left alone with her
dead, and they went to work that had work, and he who had none, took
upon him the arrangements for the funeral.

Mary had many a scolding from Miss Simmonds that day for her absence
of mind. To be sure Miss Simmonds was much put out by Mary's
non-appearance in the morning with certain bits of muslin, and shades
of silk which were wanted to complete a dress to be worn that night;
but it was true enough that Mary did not mind what she was about;
she was too busy planning how her old black gown (her best when
her mother died) might be spunged, and turned, and lengthened into
something like decent mourning for the widow. And when she went home
at night (though it was very late, as a sort of retribution for her
morning's negligence), she set to work at once, and was so busy, and
so glad over her task, that she had, every now and then, to check
herself in singing merry ditties, that she felt little accorded with
the sewing on which she was engaged.

So when the funeral day came, Mrs. Davenport was neatly arrayed in
black, a satisfaction to her poor heart in the midst of her sorrow.
Barton and Wilson both accompanied her, as she led her two elder
boys, and followed the coffin. It was a simple walking funeral, with
nothing to grate on the feelings of any; far more in accordance with
its purpose, to my mind, than the gorgeous hearses, and nodding
plumes, which form the grotesque funeral pomp of respectable people.
There was no "rattling the bones over the stones," of the pauper's
funeral. Decently and quietly was he followed to the grave by one
determined to endure her woe meekly for his sake. The only mark of
pauperism attendant on the burial concerned the living and joyous,
far more than the dead, or the sorrowful. When they arrived in the
churchyard, they halted before a raised and handsome tombstone; in
reality a wooden mockery of stone respectabilities which adorned the
burial-ground. It was easily raised in a very few minutes, and below
was the grave in which pauper bodies were piled until within a foot
or two of the surface; when the soil was shovelled over, and stamped
down, and the wooden cover went to do temporary duty over another
hole. [19] But little they recked of this who now gave up their dead.


   [Footnote 19: The case, to my certain knowledge, in one
                 churchyard in Manchester. There may be more.]




CHAPTER VII.

JEM WILSON'S REPULSE.


   "How infinite the wealth of love and hope
   Garnered in these same tiny treasure-houses!
   And oh! what bankrupts in the world we feel,
   When Death, like some remorseless creditor,
   Seizes on all we fondly thought our own!"

   "THE TWINS."


The ghoul-like fever was not to be braved with impunity, and baulked
of its prey. The widow had reclaimed her children; her neighbours,
in the good Samaritan sense of the word, had paid her little arrears
of rent, and made her a few shillings beforehand with the world.
She determined to flit from that cellar to another less full of
painful associations, less haunted by mournful memories. The board,
not so formidable as she had imagined, had inquired into her case;
and, instead of sending her to Stoke Claypole, her husband's
Buckinghamshire parish, as she had dreaded, had agreed to pay her
rent. So food for four mouths was all she was now required to find;
only for three she would have said; for herself and the unweaned
child were but reckoned as one in her calculation.

She had a strong heart, now her bodily strength had been recruited by
a week or two of food, and she would not despair. So she took in some
little children to nurse, who brought their daily food with them,
which she cooked for them, without wronging their helplessness of a
crumb; and when she had restored them to their mothers at night, she
set to work at plain sewing, "seam, and gusset, and band," and sat
thinking how she might best cheat the factory inspector, and persuade
him that her strong, big, hungry Ben was above thirteen. Her plan of
living was so far arranged, when she heard, with keen sorrow, that
Wilson's twin lads were ill of the fever.

They had never been strong. They were like many a pair of twins,
and seemed to have but one life divided between them. One life, one
strength, and in this instance, I might almost say, one brain; for
they were helpless, gentle, silly children, but not the less dear
to their parents and to their strong, active, manly, elder brother.
They were late on their feet, late in talking, late every way; had to
be nursed and cared for when other lads of their age were tumbling
about in the street, and losing themselves, and being taken to the
police-office miles away from home.

Still want had never yet come in at the door to make love for these
innocents fly out at the window. Nor was this the case even now, when
Jem Wilson's earnings, and his mother's occasional charrings were
barely sufficient to give all the family their fill of food.

But when the twins, after ailing many days, and caring little for
their meat, fell sick on the same afternoon, with the same heavy
stupor of suffering, the three hearts that loved them so, each felt,
though none acknowledged to the other, that they had little chance
for life. It was nearly a week before the tale of their illness
spread as far as the court where the Wilsons had once dwelt, and the
Bartons yet lived.

Alice had heard of the illness of her little nephews several days
before, and had locked her cellar door, and gone off straight to her
brother's house, in Ancoats; but she was often absent for days, sent
for, as her neighbours knew, to help in some sudden emergency of
illness or distress, so that occasioned no surprise.

Margaret met Jem Wilson several days after his brothers were
seriously ill, and heard from him the state of things at his home.
She told Mary of it as she entered the court late that evening; and
Mary listened with saddened heart to the strange contrast which such
woeful tidings presented to the gay and loving words she had been
hearing on her walk home. She blamed herself for being so much taken
up with visions of the golden future, that she had lately gone but
seldom on Sunday afternoons, or other leisure time, to see Mrs.
Wilson, her mother's friend; and with hasty purpose of amendment she
only stayed to leave a message for her father with the next-door
neighbour, and then went off at a brisk pace on her way to the house
of mourning.

She stopped with her hand on the latch of the Wilsons' door, to
still her beating heart, and listened to the hushed quiet within.
She opened the door softly: there sat Mrs. Wilson in the old
rocking-chair, with one sick, death-like boy lying on her knee,
crying without let or pause, but softly, gently, as fearing to
disturb the troubled, gasping child; while behind her, old Alice let
her fast-dropping tears fall down on the dead body of the other twin,
which she was laying out on a board, placed on a sort of sofa-settee
in a corner of the room. Over the child, which yet breathed, the
father bent, watching anxiously for some ground of hope, where hope
there was none. Mary stepped slowly and lightly across to Alice.

"Ay, poor lad! God has taken him early, Mary."

Mary could not speak; she did not know what to say; it was so much
worse than she expected. At last she ventured to whisper,

"Is there any chance for the other one, think you?"

Alice shook her head, and told with a look that she believed there
was none. She next endeavoured to lift the little body, and carry it
to its old accustomed bed in its parents' room. But earnest as the
father was in watching the yet-living, he had eyes and ears for all
that concerned the dead, and sprang gently up, and took his dead son
on his hard couch in his arms with tender strength, and carried him
upstairs as if afraid of wakening him.

The other child gasped longer, louder, with more of effort.

"We mun get him away from his mother. He cannot die while she's
wishing him."

"Wishing him?" said Mary, in a tone of inquiry.

"Ay; donno ye know what wishing means? There's none can die in the
arms of those who are wishing them sore to stay on earth. The soul o'
them as holds them won't let the dying soul go free; so it has a hard
struggle for the quiet of death. We mun get him away fra' his mother,
or he'll have a hard death, poor lile [20] fellow."


   [Footnote 20: "Lile," a north-country word for "little."
                 "Wit _leil_ labour to live."--_Piers Ploughman._]


So without circumlocution she went and offered to take the sinking
child. But the mother would not let him go, and looking in Alice's
face with brimming and imploring eyes, declared in earnest whispers,
that she was not wishing him, that she would fain have him released
from his suffering. Alice and Mary stood by with eyes fixed on the
poor child, whose struggles seemed to increase, till at last his
mother said with a choking voice,

"May happen [21] yo'd better take him, Alice; I believe my heart's
wishing him a' this while, for I cannot, no, I cannot bring mysel to
let my two childer go in one day; I cannot help longing to keep him,
and yet he sha'not suffer longer for me."


   [Footnote 21: "May happen," perhaps.]


She bent down, and fondly, oh! with what passionate fondness, kissed
her child, and then gave him up to Alice, who took him with tender
care. Nature's struggles were soon exhausted, and he breathed his
little life away in peace.

Then the mother lifted up her voice and wept. Her cries brought her
husband down to try with his aching heart to comfort hers. Again
Alice laid out the dead, Mary helping with reverent fear. The father
and mother carried him up-stairs to the bed, where his little brother
lay in calm repose.

Mary and Alice drew near the fire, and stood in quiet sorrow for some
time. Then Alice broke the silence by saying,

"It will be bad news for Jem, poor fellow, when he comes home."

"Where is he?" asked Mary.

"Working over-hours at th' shop. They'n getten a large order fra'
forrin parts; and yo' know, Jem mun work, though his heart's
well-nigh breaking for these poor laddies."

Again they were silent in thought, and again Alice spoke first.

"I sometimes think the Lord is against planning. Whene'er I plan
over-much, He is sure to send and mar all my plans, as if He would
ha' me put the future into His hands. Afore Christmas-time I was as
full as full could be, of going home for good and all; yo' han heard
how I've wished it this terrible long time. And a young lass from
behind Burton came into place in Manchester last Martinmas; so after
awhile, she had a Sunday out, and she comes to me, and tells me some
cousins o' mine bid her find me out, and say how glad they should be
to ha' me to bide wi' 'em, and look after th' childer, for they'n
getten a big farm, and she's a deal to do among th' cows. So many
a winter's night did I lie awake and think, that please God, come
summer, I'd bid George and his wife good bye, and go home at last.
Little did I think how God Almighty would baulk me, for not leaving
my days in His hands, who had led me through the wilderness hitherto.
Here's George out o' work, and more cast down than ever I seed him;
wanting every chip o' comfort he can get, e'en afore this last heavy
stroke; and now I'm thinking the Lord's finger points very clear to
my fit abiding place; and I'm sure if George and Jane can say 'His
will be done,' it's no more than what I'm beholden to do."

So saying, she fell to tidying the room, removing as much as she
could every vestige of sickness; making up the fire, and setting on
the kettle for a cup of tea for her sister-in-law, whose low moans
and sobs were occasionally heard in the room below.

Mary helped her in all these little offices. They were busy in this
way when the door was softly opened, and Jem came in, all grimed and
dirty from his night-work, his soiled apron wrapped round his middle,
in guise and apparel in which he would have been sorry at another
time to have been seen by Mary. But just now he hardly saw her; he
went straight up to Alice, and asked how the little chaps were. They
had been a shade better at dinner-time, and he had been working away
through the long afternoon, and far into the night, in the belief
that they had taken the turn. He had stolen out during the half-hour
allowed at the works for tea, to buy them an orange or two, which now
puffed out his jacket-pocket.

He would make his aunt speak; he would not understand her shakes of
the head and fast coursing tears.

"They're both gone," said she.

"Dead!"

"Ay! poor fellows. They took worse about two o'clock. Joe went first,
as easy as a lamb, and Will died harder like."

"Both!"

"Ay, lad! both. The Lord has ta'en them from some evil to come, or He
would na ha' made choice o' them. Ye may rest sure o' that."

Jem went to the cupboard, and quietly extricated from his pocket
the oranges he had bought. But he stayed long there, and at last
his sturdy frame shook with his strong agony. The two women were
frightened, as women always are, on witnessing a man's overpowering
grief. They cried afresh in company. Mary's heart melted within her
as she witnessed Jem's sorrow, and she stepped gently up to the
corner where he stood, with his back turned to them, and putting her
hand softly on his arm, said,

"Oh, Jem, don't give way so; I cannot bear to see you."

Jem felt a strange leap of joy in his heart, and knew the power she
had of comforting him. He did not speak, as though fearing to destroy
by sound or motion the happiness of that moment, when her soft
hand's touch thrilled through his frame, and her silvery voice was
whispering tenderness in his ear. Yes! it might be very wrong; he
could almost hate himself for it; with death and woe so surrounding
him, it yet was happiness, was bliss, to be so spoken to by Mary.

"Don't, Jem, please don't," whispered she again, believing that his
silence was only another form of grief.

He could not contain himself. He took her hand in his firm yet
trembling grasp, and said, in tones that instantly produced a
revulsion in her mood,

"Mary, I almost loathe myself when I feel I would not give up this
minute, when my brothers lie dead, and father and mother are in such
trouble, for all my life that's past and gone. And, Mary (as she
tried to release her hand), you know what makes me feel so blessed."

She did know--he was right there. But as he turned to catch a look at
her sweet face, he saw that it expressed unfeigned distress, almost
amounting to vexation; a dread of him, that he thought was almost
repugnance.

He let her hand go, and she quickly went away to Alice's side.

"Fool that I was--nay, wretch that I was--to let myself take this
time of trouble to tell her how I loved her; no wonder that she turns
away from such a selfish beast."

Partly to relieve her from his presence, and partly from natural
desire, and partly, perhaps, from a penitent wish to share to the
utmost his parents' sorrow, he soon went up-stairs to the chamber of
death.

Mary mechanically helped Alice in all the duties she performed
through the remainder of that long night, but she did not see Jem
again. He remained up-stairs until after the early dawn showed Mary
that she need have no fear of going home through the deserted and
quiet streets, to try and get a little sleep before work hour. So
leaving kind messages to George and Jane Wilson, and hesitating
whether she might dare to send a few kind words to Jem, and deciding
that she had better not, she stepped out into the bright morning
light, so fresh a contrast to the darkened room where death had been.

            "They had
   Another morn than ours."

Mary lay down on her bed in her clothes; and whether it was this, or
the broad daylight that poured in through the sky-window, or whether
it was over-excitement, it was long before she could catch a wink of
sleep. Her thoughts ran on Jem's manner and words; not but what she
had known the tale they told for many a day; but still she wished he
had not put it so plainly.

"Oh dear," said she to herself, "I wish he would not mistake me so; I
never dare to speak a common word o' kindness, but his eye brightens
and his cheek flushes. It's very hard on me; for father and George
Wilson are old friends; and Jem and I ha' known each other since we
were quite children. I cannot think what possesses me, that I must
always be wanting to comfort him when he's downcast, and that I must
go meddling wi' him to-night, when sure enough it was his aunt's
place to speak to him. I don't care for him, and yet, unless I'm
always watching myself, I'm speaking to him in a loving voice. I
think I cannot go right, for I either check myself till I'm downright
cross to him, or else I speak just natural, and that's too kind and
tender by half. And I'm as good as engaged to be married to another;
and another far handsomer than Jem; only I think I like Jem's face
best for all that; liking's liking, and there's no help for it. Well,
when I'm Mrs. Harry Carson, may happen I can put some good fortune in
Jem's way. But will he thank me for it? He's rather savage at times,
that I can see, and perhaps kindness from me, when I'm another's,
will only go against the grain. I'll not plague myself wi' thinking
any more about him, that I won't."

So she turned on her pillow, and fell asleep, and dreamt of what was
often in her waking thoughts; of the day when she should ride from
church in her carriage, with wedding-bells ringing, and take up
her astonished father, and drive away from the old dim work-a-day
court for ever, to live in a grand house, where her father should
have newspapers, and pamphlets, and pipes, and meat dinners every
day,--and all day long if he liked.

Such thoughts mingled in her predilection for the handsome young
Mr. Carson, who, unfettered by work-hours, let scarcely a day pass
without contriving a meeting with the beautiful little milliner he
had first seen while lounging in a shop where his sisters were making
some purchases, and afterwards never rested till he had freely,
though respectfully, made her acquaintance in her daily walks. He
was, to use his own expression to himself, quite infatuated by her,
and was restless each day till the time came when he had a chance,
and, of late, more than a chance of meeting her. There was something
of keen practical shrewdness about her, which contrasted very
bewitchingly with the simple, foolish, unworldly ideas she had picked
up from the romances which Miss Simmonds' young ladies were in the
habit of recommending to each other.

Yes! Mary was ambitious, and did not favour Mr. Carson the less
because he was rich and a gentleman. The old leaven, infused years
ago by her aunt Esther, fermented in her little bosom, and perhaps
all the more, for her father's aversion to the rich and the gentle.
Such is the contrariness of the human heart, from Eve downwards, that
we all, in our old-Adam state, fancy things forbidden sweetest. So
Mary dwelt upon and enjoyed the idea of some day becoming a lady, and
doing all the elegant nothings appertaining to ladyhood. It was a
comfort to her, when scolded by Miss Simmonds, to think of the day
when she would drive up to the door in her own carriage, to order her
gowns from the hasty tempered yet kind dressmaker. It was a pleasure
to her to hear the general admiration of the two elder Miss Carsons,
acknowledged beauties in ball-room and street, on horseback and on
foot, and to think of the time when she should ride and walk with
them in loving sisterhood. But the best of her plans, the holiest,
that which in some measure redeemed the vanity of the rest, were
those relating to her father; her dear father, now oppressed with
care, and always a disheartened, gloomy person. How she would
surround him with every comfort she could devise (of course, he was
to live with them), till he should acknowledge riches to be very
pleasant things, and bless his lady-daughter! Every one who had shown
her kindness in her low estate should then be repaid a hundred-fold.

Such were the castles in air, the Alnaschar-visions in which Mary
indulged, and which she was doomed in after days to expiate with many
tears.

Meanwhile, her words--or, even more, her tones--would maintain their
hold on Jem Wilson's memory. A thrill would yet come over him when
he remembered how her hand had rested on his arm. The thought of her
mingled with all his grief, and it was profound, for the loss of his
brothers.




CHAPTER VIII.

MARGARET'S DEBUT AS A PUBLIC SINGER.


   "Deal gently with them, they have much endured.
   Scoff not at their fond hopes and earnest plans,
   Though they may seem to thee wild dreams and fancies.
   Perchance, in the rough school of stern experience,
   They've something learned which Theory does not teach;
   Or if they greatly err, deal gently still,
   And let their error but the stronger plead
   'Give us the light and guidance that we need!'"

   LOVE THOUGHTS.


One Sunday afternoon, about three weeks after that mournful night,
Jem Wilson set out with the ostensible purpose of calling on John
Barton. He was dressed in his best, his Sunday suit of course; while
his face glittered with the scrubbing he had bestowed on it. His dark
black hair had been arranged and re-arranged before the household
looking-glass, and in his button-hole he stuck a narcissus (a sweet
Nancy is its pretty Lancashire name), hoping it would attract Mary's
notice, so that he might have the delight of giving it her.

It was a bad beginning of his visit of happiness that Mary saw him
some minutes before he came into her father's house. She was sitting
at the end of the dresser, with the little window-blind drawn on one
side, in order that she might see the passers-by, in the intervals
of reading her Bible, which lay open before her. So she watched
all the greeting a friend gave Jem; she saw the face of condolence,
the sympathetic shake of the hand, and had time to arrange her own
face and manner before Jem came in, which he did, as if he had eyes
for no one but her father, who sat smoking his pipe by the fire,
while he read an old "Northern Star," borrowed from a neighbouring
public-house.

Then he turned to Mary, who, he felt by the sure instinct of love,
by which almost his body thought, was present. Her hands were busy
adjusting her dress; a forced and unnecessary movement Jem could not
help thinking. Her accost was quiet and friendly, if grave; she felt
that she reddened like a rose, and wished she could prevent it, while
Jem wondered if her blushes arose from fear, or anger, or love.

She was very cunning, I am afraid. She pretended to read diligently,
and not to listen to a word that was said, while, in fact, she heard
all sounds, even to Jem's long, deep sighs, which wrung her heart. At
last she took up her Bible, and as if their conversation disturbed
her, went up-stairs to her little room. And she had scarcely spoken
a word to Jem; scarcely looked at him; never noticed his beautiful
sweet Nancy, which only awaited her least word of praise to be hers!
He did not know--that pang was spared--that in her little dingy
bed-room, stood a white jug, filled with a luxuriant bunch of early
spring roses, making the whole room fragrant and bright. They were
the gift of her richer lover. So Jem had to go on sitting with John
Barton, fairly caught in his own trap, and had to listen to his talk,
and answer him as best he might.

"There's the right stuff in this here 'Star,' and no mistake. Such a
right-down piece for short hours."

"At the same rate of wages as now?" asked Jem.

"Ay, ay! else where's the use? It's only taking out o' the masters'
pocket what they can well afford. Did I ever tell yo what th'
Infirmary chap let me into, many a year agone?"

"No," said Jem, listlessly.

"Well! yo must know I were in th' Infirmary for a fever, and times
were rare and bad; and there be good chaps there to a man, while he's
wick, [22] whate'er they may be about cutting him up at after. [23]
So when I were better o' th' fever, but weak as water, they says to
me, says they, 'If yo can write, yo may stay in a week longer, and
help our surgeon wi' sorting his papers; and we'll take care yo've
your belly full o' meat and drink. Yo'll be twice as strong in a
week.' So there wanted but one word to that bargain. So I were set to
writing and copying; th' writing I could do well enough, but they'd
such queer ways o' spelling that I'd ne'er been used to, that I'd to
look first at th' copy and then at my letters, for all the world like
a cock picking up grains o' corn. But one thing startled me e'en
then, and I thought I'd make bold to ask the surgeon the meaning o't.
I've gotten no head for numbers, but this I know, that by _far th'
greater part o' th' accidents as comed in, happened in th' last two
hours o' work_, when folk getten tired and careless. Th' surgeon
said it were all true, and that he were going to bring that fact to
light."


   [Footnote 22: "Wick," alive. Anglo-Saxon, cwic. "The _quick_
                 and the dead."--_Book of Common Prayer._]

   [Footnote 23: "At after." "_At after souper goth this noble
                 king._" _Chaucer; The Squire's Tale._]


Jem was pondering Mary's conduct; but the pause made him aware he
ought to utter some civil listening noise; so he said

"Very true."

"Ay, it's true enough, my lad, that we're sadly over-borne, and worse
will come of it afore long. Block-printers is going to strike; they'n
getten a bang-up union, as won't let 'em be put upon. But there's
many a thing will happen afore long, as folk don't expect. Yo may
take my word for that, Jem."

Jem was very willing to take it, but did not express the curiosity
he should have done. So John Barton thought he'd try another hint or
two.

"Working folk won't be ground to the dust much longer. We'n a' had as
much to bear as human nature can bear. So, if th' masters can't do us
no good, and they say they can't, we mun try higher folk."

Still Jem was not curious. He gave up hope of seeing Mary again by
her own good free will; and the next best thing would be, to be alone
to think of her. So, muttering something which he meant to serve
as an excuse for his sudden departure, he hastily wished John good
afternoon, and left him to resume his pipe and his politics.

For three years past, trade had been getting worse and worse, and the
price of provisions higher and higher. This disparity between the
amount of the earnings of the working classes and the price of their
food, occasioned, in more cases than could well be imagined, disease
and death. Whole families went through a gradual starvation. They
only wanted a Dante to record their sufferings. And yet even his
words would fall short of the awful truth; they could only present an
outline of the tremendous facts of the destitution that surrounded
thousands upon thousands in the terrible years 1839, 1840, and 1841.
Even philanthropists who had studied the subject, were forced to own
themselves perplexed in their endeavour to ascertain the real causes
of the misery; the whole matter was of so complicated a nature,
that it became next to impossible to understand it thoroughly. It
need excite no surprise then to learn that a bad feeling between
working-men and the upper classes became very strong in this season
of privation. The indigence and sufferings of the operatives induced
a suspicion in the minds of many of them, that their legislators,
their magistrates, their employers, and even the ministers of
religion, were, in general, their oppressors and enemies; and were in
league for their prostration and enthralment. The most deplorable and
enduring evil that arose out of the period of commercial depression
to which I refer, was this feeling of alienation between the
different classes of society. It is so impossible to describe, or
even faintly to picture, the state of distress which prevailed in the
town at that time, that I will not attempt it; and yet I think again
that surely, in a Christian land, it was not known even so feebly
as words could tell it, or the more happy and fortunate would have
thronged with their sympathy and their aid. In many instances the
sufferers wept first, and then they cursed. Their vindictive feelings
exhibited themselves in rabid politics. And when I hear, as I have
heard, of the sufferings and privations of the poor, of provision
shops where ha'porths of tea, sugar, butter, and even flour, were
sold to accommodate the indigent,--of parents sitting in their
clothes by the fire-side during the whole night for seven weeks
together, in order that their only bed and bedding might be reserved
for the use of their large family,--of others sleeping upon the
cold hearth-stone for weeks in succession, without adequate means
of providing themselves with food or fuel (and this in the depth
of winter),--of others being compelled to fast for days together,
uncheered by any hope of better fortune, living, moreover, or rather
starving, in a crowded garret, or damp cellar, and gradually sinking
under the pressure of want and despair into a premature grave; and
when this has been confirmed by the evidence of their care-worn
looks, their excited feelings, and their desolate homes,--can I
wonder that many of them, in such times of misery and destitution,
spoke and acted with ferocious precipitation?

An idea was now springing up among the operatives, that originated
with the Chartists, but which came at last to be cherished as a
darling child by many and many a one. They could not believe that
government knew of their misery; they rather chose to think it
possible that men could voluntarily assume the office of legislators
for a nation, ignorant of its real state; as who should make domestic
rules for the pretty behaviour of children, without caring to know
that those children had been kept for days without food. Besides,
the starving multitudes had heard, that the very existence of their
distress had been denied in Parliament; and though they felt this
strange and inexplicable, yet the idea that their misery had still
to be revealed in all its depths, and that then some remedy would be
found, soothed their aching hearts, and kept down their rising fury.

So a petition was framed, and signed by thousands in the bright
spring days of 1839, imploring Parliament to hear witnesses who
could testify to the unparalleled destitution of the manufacturing
districts. Nottingham, Sheffield, Glasgow, Manchester, and many other
towns, were busy appointing delegates to convey this petition, who
might speak, not merely of what they had seen, and had heard, but
from what they had borne and suffered. Life-worn, gaunt, anxious,
hunger-stamped men, were those delegates.

One of them was John Barton. He would have been ashamed to own the
flutter of spirits his appointment gave him. There was the childish
delight of seeing London--that went a little way, and but a little
way. There was the vain idea of speaking out his notions before so
many grand folk--that went a little further; and last, there was the
really pure gladness of heart, arising from the idea that he was one
of those chosen to be instruments in making known the distresses of
the people, and consequently in procuring them some grand relief,
by means of which they should never suffer want or care any more.
He hoped largely, but vaguely, of the results of his expedition. An
argosy of the precious hopes of many otherwise despairing creatures,
was that petition to be heard concerning their sufferings.

The night before the morning on which the Manchester delegates were
to leave for London, Barton might be said to hold a levée, so many
neighbours came dropping in. Job Legh had early established himself
and his pipe by John Barton's fire, not saying much, but puffing
away, and imagining himself of use in adjusting the smoothing-irons
that hung before the fire, ready for Mary when she should want them.
As for Mary, her employment was the same as that of Beau Tibbs' wife,
"just washing her father's two shirts," in the pantry back-kitchen;
for she was anxious about his appearance in London. (The coat had
been redeemed, though the silk handkerchief was forfeited.) The door
stood open, as usual, between the houseplace and back-kitchen, so she
gave her greeting to their friends as they entered.

"So, John, yo're bound for London, are yo?" said one.

"Ay, I suppose I mun go," answered John, yielding to necessity as it
were.

"Well, there's many a thing I'd like yo to speak on to the Parliament
people. Thou'lt not spare 'em, John, I hope. Tell 'em our minds; how
we're thinking we've been clemmed long enough, and we donnot see
whatten good they'n been doing, if they can't give us what we're all
crying for sin' the day we were born."

"Ay, ay! I'll tell 'em that, and much more to it, when it gets to my
turn; but thou knows there's many will have their word afore me."

"Well, thou'lt speak at last. Bless thee, lad, do ask 'em to make
th' masters break th' machines. There's never been good times sin'
spinning-jennies came up."

"Machines is th' ruin of poor folk," chimed in several voices.

"For my part," said a shivering, half-clad man, who crept near the
fire, as if ague-stricken, "I would like thee to tell 'em to pass th'
Short-hours Bill. Flesh and blood gets wearied wi' so much work; why
should factory hands work so much longer nor other trades? Just ask
'em that, Barton, will ye?"

Barton was saved the necessity of answering, by the entrance of
Mrs. Davenport, the poor widow he had been so kind to; she looked
half-fed, and eager, but was decently clad. In her hand she brought a
little newspaper parcel, which she took to Mary, who opened it, and
then called out, dangling a shirt collar from her soapy fingers:

"See, father, what a dandy you'll be in London! Mrs. Davenport has
brought you this; made new cut, all after the fashion.--Thank you for
thinking on him."

"Eh, Mary!" said Mrs. Davenport, in a low voice. "Whatten's all I can
do, to what he's done for me and mine? But, Mary, sure I can help ye,
for you'll be busy wi' this journey."

"Just help me wring these out, and then I'll take 'em to th' mangle."

So Mrs. Davenport became a listener to the conversation; and after a
while joined in.

"I'm sure, John Barton, if yo are taking messages to the Parliament
folk, yo'll not object to telling 'em what a sore trial it is, this
law o' theirs, keeping childer fra' factory work, whether they be
weakly or strong. There's our Ben; why, porridge seems to go no way
wi' him, he eats so much; and I han gotten no money to send him t'
school, as I would like; and there he is, rampaging about th' streets
a' day, getting hungrier and hungrier, and picking up a' manner o'
bad ways; and th' inspector won't let him in to work in th' factory,
because he's not right age; though he's twice as strong as Sankey's
little ritling [24] of a lad, as works till he cries for his legs
aching so, though he is right age, and better."


   [Footnote 24: "Ritling," probably a corruption of "ricketling,"
                 a child that suffers from the rickets--a weakling.]


"I've one plan I wish to tell John Barton," said a pompous,
careful-speaking man, "and I should like him for to lay it afore
the Honourable House. My mother comed out o' Oxfordshire, and were
under-laundry-maid in Sir Francis Dashwood's family; and when we were
little ones, she'd tell us stories of their grandeur; and one thing
she named were, that Sir Francis wore two shirts a day. Now he were
all as one as a Parliament man; and many on 'em, I han no doubt, are
like extravagant. Just tell 'em, John, do, that they'd be doing th'
Lancashire weavers a great kindness, if they'd ha' their shirts a'
made o' calico; 'twould make trade brisk, that would, wi' the power
o' shirts they wear."

Job Legh now put in his word. Taking the pipe out of his mouth, and
addressing the last speaker, he said:

"I'll tell ye what, Bill, and no offence, mind ye; there's but
hundreds of them Parliament folk as wear so many shirts to their
back; but there's thousands and thousands o' poor weavers as han
only gotten one shirt i' th' world; ay, and don't know where t'
get another when that rag's done, though they're turning out miles
o' calico every day; and many a mile o't is lying in warehouses,
stopping up trade for want o' purchasers. Yo take my advice, John
Barton, and ask Parliament to set trade free, so as workmen can earn
a decent wage, and buy their two, ay and three, shirts a-year; that
would make weaving brisk."

He put his pipe in his mouth again, and redoubled his puffing to make
up for lost time.

"I'm afeard, neighbours," said John Barton, "I've not much chance o'
telling 'em all yo say; what I think on, is just speaking out about
the distress that they say is nought. When they hear o' children born
on wet flags, without a rag t' cover 'em, or a bit o' food for th'
mother; when they hear of folk lying down to die i' th' streets, or
hiding their want i' some hole o' a cellar till death come to set 'em
free; and when they hear o' all this plague, pestilence, and famine,
they'll surely do somewhat wiser for us than we can guess at now.
Howe'er, I han no objection, if so be there's an opening, to speak up
for what yo say; anyhow, I'll do my best, and yo see now, if better
times don't come after Parliament knows all."

Some shook their heads, but more looked cheery; and then one by one
dropped off, leaving John and his daughter alone.

"Didst thou mark how poorly Jane Wilson looked?" asked he, as they
wound up their hard day's work by a supper eaten over the fire, which
glowed and glimmered through the room, and formed their only light.

"No, I can't say as I did. But she's never rightly held up her head
since the twins died; and all along she has never been a strong
woman."

"Never sin' her accident. Afore that I mind her looking as fresh and
likely a girl as e'er a one in Manchester."

"What accident, father?"

"She cotched [25] her side again a wheel. It were afore wheels were
boxed up. It were just when she were to have been married, and many
a one thought George would ha' been off his bargain; but I knew he
wern't the chap for that trick. Pretty near the first place she went
to when she were able to go about again, was th' Oud Church; poor
wench, all pale and limping she went up the aisle, George holding
her up as tender as a mother, and walking as slow as e'er he could,
not to hurry her, though there were plenty enow of rude lads to cast
their jests at him and her. Her face were white like a sheet when
she came in church, but afore she got to th' altar she were all one
flush. But for a' that it's been a happy marriage, and George has
stuck by me through life like a brother. He'll never hold up his head
again if he loses Jane. I didn't like her looks to-night."


   [Footnote 25: "Cotched," caught.]


And so he went to bed, the fear of forthcoming sorrow to his friend
mingling with his thoughts of to-morrow, and his hopes for the
future. Mary watched him set off, with her hands over her eyes to
shade them from the bright slanting rays of the morning sun, and then
she turned into the house to arrange its disorder before going to
her work. She wondered if she should like or dislike the evening and
morning solitude; for several hours when the clock struck she thought
of her father, and wondered where he was; she made good resolutions
according to her lights; and by-and-bye came the distractions and
events of the broad full day to occupy her with the present, and to
deaden the memory of the absent.

One of Mary's resolutions was, that she would not be persuaded or
induced to see Mr. Harry Carson during her father's absence. There
was something crooked in her conscience after all; for this very
resolution seemed an acknowledgment that it was wrong to meet him at
any time; and yet she had brought herself to think her conduct quite
innocent and proper, for although unknown to her father, and certain,
even did he know it, to fail of obtaining his sanction, she esteemed
her love-meetings with Mr. Carson as sure to end in her father's good
and happiness. But now that he was away, she would do nothing that he
would disapprove of; no, not even though it was for his own good in
the end.

Now, amongst Miss Simmonds' young ladies was one who had been from
the beginning a confidant in Mary's love affair, made so by Mr.
Carson himself. He had felt the necessity of some third person to
carry letters and messages, and to plead his cause when he was
absent. In a girl named Sally Leadbitter he had found a willing
advocate. She would have been willing to have embarked in a
love-affair herself (especially a clandestine one), for the mere
excitement of the thing; but her willingness was strengthened by
sundry half-sovereigns, which from time to time Mr. Carson bestowed
upon her.

Sally Leadbitter was vulgar-minded to the last degree; never easy
unless her talk was of love and lovers; in her eyes it was an honour
to have had a long list of wooers. So constituted, it was a pity
that Sally herself was but a plain, red-haired, freckled girl; never
likely, one would have thought, to become a heroine on her own
account. But what she lacked in beauty she tried to make up for by a
kind of witty boldness, which gave her what her betters would have
called piquancy. Considerations of modesty or propriety never checked
her utterance of a good thing. She had just talent enough to corrupt
others. Her very good-nature was an evil influence. They could not
hate one who was so kind; they could not avoid one who was so willing
to shield them from scrapes by any exertion of her own; whose ready
fingers would at any time make up for their deficiencies, and whose
still more convenient tongue would at any time invent for them. The
Jews, or Mohammedans (I forget which), believe that there is one
little bone of our body, one of the vertebræ, if I remember rightly,
which will never decay and turn to dust, but will lie incorrupt and
indestructible in the ground until the Last Day: this is the Seed of
the Soul. The most depraved have also their Seed of the Holiness that
shall one day overcome their evil, their one good quality, lurking
hidden, but safe, among all the corrupt and bad.

Sally's seed of the future soul was her love for her mother, an
aged bedridden woman. For her she had self-denial; for her, her
good-nature rose into tenderness; to cheer her lonely bed, her
spirits, in the evenings when her body was often woefully tired,
never flagged, but were ready to recount the events of the day, to
turn them into ridicule, and to mimic, with admirable fidelity, any
person gifted with an absurdity who had fallen under her keen eye.
But the mother was lightly principled like Sally herself; nor was
there need to conceal from her the reason why Mr. Carson gave her
so much money. She chuckled with pleasure, and only hoped that the
wooing would be long a-doing.

Still neither she, nor her daughter, nor Harry Carson liked this
resolution of Mary, not to see him during her father's absence.

One evening (and the early summer evenings were long and bright now),
Sally met Mr. Carson by appointment, to be charged with a letter for
Mary, imploring her to see him, which Sally was to back with all
her powers of persuasion. After parting from him she determined, as
it was not so very late, to go at once to Mary's, and deliver the
message and letter.

She found Mary in great sorrow. She had just heard of George Wilson's
sudden death: her old friend, her father's friend, Jem's father--all
his claims came rushing upon her. Though not guarded from unnecessary
sight or sound of death, as the children of the rich are, yet it had
so often been brought home to her this last three or four months. It
was so terrible thus to see friend after friend depart. Her father,
too, who had dreaded Jane Wilson's death the evening before he set
off. And she, the weakly, was left behind while the strong man was
taken. At any rate the sorrow her father had so feared for him was
spared. Such were the thoughts which came over her.

She could not go to comfort the bereaved, even if comfort were in her
power to give; for she had resolved to avoid Jem; and she felt that
this of all others was not the occasion on which she could keep up a
studiously cold manner.

And in this shock of grief, Sally Leadbitter was the last person
she wished to see. However, she rose to welcome her, betraying her
tear-swollen face.

"Well, I shall tell Mr. Carson to-morrow how you're fretting for him;
it's no more nor he's doing for you, I can tell you."

"For him, indeed!" said Mary, with a toss of her pretty head.

"Ay, miss, for him! You've been sighing as if your heart would break
now for several days, over your work; now arn't you a little goose
not to go and see one who I am sure loves you as his life, and whom
you love; 'How much, Mary?' 'This much,' as the children say"
(opening her arms very wide).

"Nonsense," said Mary, pouting; "I often think I don't love him at
all."

"And I'm to tell him that, am I, next time I see him?" asked Sally.

"If you like," replied Mary. "I'm sure I don't care for that or any
thing else now;" weeping afresh.

But Sally did not like to be the bearer of any such news. She saw she
had gone on the wrong tack, and that Mary's heart was too full to
value either message or letter as she ought. So she wisely paused
in their delivery, and said in a more sympathetic tone than she had
heretofore used,

"Do tell me, Mary, what's fretting you so? You know I never could
abide to see you cry."

"George Wilson's dropped down dead this afternoon," said Mary, fixing
her eyes for one minute on Sally, and the next hiding her face in her
apron as she sobbed anew.

"Dear, dear! All flesh is grass; here to-day and gone to-morrow,
as the Bible says. Still he was an old man, and not good for much;
there's better folk than him left behind. Is th' canting old maid as
was his sister alive yet?"

"I don't know who you mean," said Mary, sharply; for she did know,
and did not like to have her dear, simple Alice so spoken of.

"Come, Mary, don't be so innocent. Is Miss Alice Wilson alive, then;
will that please you? I haven't seen her hereabouts lately."

"No, she's left living here. When the twins died she thought she
could, may be, be of use to her sister, who was sadly cast down, and
Alice thought she could cheer her up; at any rate she could listen to
her when her heart grew overburdened; so she gave up her cellar and
went to live with them."

"Well, good go with her. I'd no fancy for her, and I'd no fancy for
her making my pretty Mary into a Methodee."

"She wasn't a Methodee, she was Church o' England."

"Well, well, Mary, you're very particular. You know what I meant.
Look, who is this letter from?" holding up Henry Carson's letter.

"I don't know, and don't care," said Mary, turning very red.

"My eye! as if I didn't know you did know and did care."

"Well, give it me," said Mary, impatiently, and anxious in her
present mood for her visitor's departure.

Sally relinquished it unwillingly. She had, however, the pleasure of
seeing Mary dimple and blush as she read the letter, which seemed to
say the writer was not indifferent to her.

"You must tell him I can't come," said Mary, raising her eyes at
last. "I have said I won't meet him while father is away, and I
won't."

"But, Mary, he does so look for you. You'd be quite sorry for him,
he's so put out about not seeing you. Besides you go when your
father's at home, without letting on [26] to him, and what harm would
there be in going now?"


   [Footnote 26: "Letting on," informing. In Anglo-Saxon, one
                 meaning of "lætan" was "to admit;" and we say,
                 to _let_ out a secret.]


"Well, Sally! you know my answer, I won't; and I won't."

"I'll tell him to come and see you himself some evening, instead o'
sending me; he'd may be find you not so hard to deal with."

Mary flashed up.

"If he dares to come here while father's away, I'll call the
neighbours in to turn him out, so don't be putting him up to that."

"Mercy on us! one would think you were the first girl that ever had
a lover; have you never heard what other girls do and think no shame
of?"

"Hush, Sally! that's Margaret Jennings at the door."

And in an instant Margaret was in the room. Mary had begged Job Legh
to let her come and sleep with her. In the uncertain fire-light you
could not help noticing that she had the groping walk of a blind
person.

"Well, I must go, Mary," said Sally. "And that's your last word?"

"Yes, yes; good-night." She shut the door gladly on her unwelcome
visitor--unwelcome at that time at least.

"Oh Margaret, have ye heard this sad news about George Wilson?"

"Yes, that I have. Poor creatures, they've been sore tried lately.
Not that I think sudden death so bad a thing; it's easy, and there's
no terrors for him as dies. For them as survives it's very hard. Poor
George! he were such a hearty looking man."

"Margaret," said Mary, who had been closely observing her friend,
"thou'rt very blind to-night, arn't thou? Is it wi' crying? Your eyes
are so swollen and red."

"Yes, dear! but not crying for sorrow. Han ye heard where I was last
night?"

"No; where?"

"Look here." She held up a bright golden sovereign. Mary opened her
large gray eyes with astonishment.

"I'll tell you all how and about it. You see there's a gentleman
lecturing on music at th' Mechanics', and he wants folk to sing his
songs. Well, last night th' counter got a sore throat and couldn't
make a note. So they sent for me. Jacob Butterworth had said a good
word for me, and they asked me would I sing? You may think I was
frightened, but I thought now or never, and said I'd do my best. So I
tried o'er the songs wi' th' lecturer, and then th' managers told me
I were to make myself decent and be there by seven."

"And what did you put on?" asked Mary. "Oh, why didn't you come in
for my pretty pink gingham?"

"I did think on't; but you had na come home then. No! I put on my
merino, as was turned last winter, and my white shawl, and did my
hair pretty tidy; it did well enough. Well, but as I was saying, I
went at seven. I couldn't see to read my music, but I took th' paper
in wi' me, to ha' somewhat to do wi' my fingers. Th' folks' heads
danced, as I stood as right afore 'em all as if I'd been going to
play at ball wi' 'em. You may guess I felt squeamish, but mine
weren't the first song, and th' music sounded like a friend's voice,
telling me to take courage. So to make a long story short, when it
were all o'er th' lecturer thanked me, and th' managers said as how
there never was a new singer so applauded (for they'd clapped and
stamped after I'd done, till I began to wonder how many pair o' shoes
they'd get through a week at that rate, let alone their hands). So
I'm to sing again o' Thursday; and I got a sovereign last night,
and am to have half-a-sovereign every night th' lecturer is at th'
Mechanics'."

"Well, Margaret, I'm right glad to hear it."

"And I don't think you've heard the best bit yet. Now that a way
seemed opened to me, of not being a burden to any one, though it did
please God to make me blind, I thought I'd tell grandfather. I only
telled him about the singing and the sovereign last night, for I
thought I'd not send him to bed wi' a heavy heart; but this morning
I telled him all."

"And how did he take it?"

"He's not a man of many words; and it took him by surprise like."

"I wonder at that; I've noticed it in your ways ever since you telled
me."

"Ay, that's it! If I'd not telled you, and you'd seen me every day,
you'd not ha' noticed the little mite o' difference fra' day to day."

"Well, but what did your grandfather say?"

"Why, Mary," said Margaret, half smiling, "I'm a bit loath to tell
yo, for unless yo knew grandfather's ways like me, yo'd think it
strange. He were taken by surprise, and he said: 'Damn yo!' Then he
began looking at his book as it were, and were very quiet, while I
telled him all about it; how I'd feared, and how downcast I'd been;
and how I were now reconciled to it, if it were th' Lord's will; and
how I hoped to earn money by singing; and while I were talking, I
saw great big tears come dropping on th' book; but in course I never
let on that I saw 'em. Dear grandfather! and all day long he's been
quietly moving things out o' my way, as he thought might trip me
up, and putting things in my way, as he thought I might want; never
knowing I saw and felt what he were doing; for, yo see, he thinks I'm
out and out blind, I guess--as I shall be soon."

Margaret sighed, in spite of her cheerful and relieved tone.

Though Mary caught the sigh, she felt it was better to let it pass
without notice, and began, with the tact which true sympathy rarely
fails to supply, to ask a variety of questions respecting her
friend's musical debut, which tended to bring out more distinctly how
successful it had been.

"Why, Margaret," at length she exclaimed, "thou'lt become as famous,
may be, as that grand lady fra' London, as we seed one night driving
up to th' concert room door in her carriage."

"It looks very like it," said Margaret, with a smile. "And be sure,
Mary, I'll not forget to give thee a lift now an' then when that
comes about. Nay, who knows, if thou'rt a good girl, but mayhappen
I may make thee my lady's maid! Wouldn't that be nice? So I'll e'en
sing to mysel' th' beginning o' one o' my songs,

   'An' ye shall walk in silk attire,
   An' siller hae to spare.'"

"Nay, don't stop; or else give me something a bit more new, for
somehow I never quite liked that part about thinking o' Donald mair."

"Well, though I'm a bit tir'd, I don't care if I do. Before I come,
I were practising well nigh upon two hours this one which I'm to
sing o' Thursday. Th' lecturer said he were sure it would just suit
me, and I should do justice to it; and I should be right sorry to
disappoint him, he were so nice and encouraging like to me. Eh! Mary,
what a pity there isn't more o' that way, and less scolding and
rating i' th' world! It would go a vast deal further. Beside, some o'
th' singers said they were a'most certain it were a song o' his own,
because he were so fidgetty and particular about it, and so anxious
I should give it th' proper expression. And that makes me care still
more. Th' first verse, he said, were to be sung 'tenderly, but
joyously!' I'm afraid I don't quite hit that, but I'll try.

   'What a single word can do!
   Thrilling all the heart-strings through,
   Calling forth fond memories,
   Raining round hope's melodies,
   Steeping all in one bright hue--
   What a single word can do!'

Now it falls into th' minor key, and must be very sad like. I feel
as if I could do that better than t'other.

   'What a single word can do!
   Making life seem all untrue,
   Driving joy and hope away,
   Leaving not one cheering ray
   Blighting every flower that grew--
   What a single word can do!'"

Margaret certainly made the most of this little song. As a factory
worker, listening outside, observed, "She spun it reet [27] fine!"
And if she only sang it at the Mechanics' with half the feeling she
put into it that night, the lecturer must have been hard to please,
if he did not admit that his expectations were more than fulfilled.


   [Footnote 27: "Reet," right; often used for "very."]


When it was ended, Mary's looks told more than words could have done
what she thought of it; and partly to keep in a tear which would fain
have rolled out, she brightened into a laugh, and said, "For certain,
th' carriage is coming. So let us go and dream on it."




CHAPTER IX.

BARTON'S LONDON EXPERIENCES.


   "A life of self-indulgence is for us,
     A life of self-denial is for them;
   For us the streets, broad-built and populous,
     For them unhealthy corners, garrets dim,
     And cellars where the water-rat may swim!
   For us green paths refreshed by frequent rain,
     For them dark alleys where the dust lies grim!
   Not doomed by us to this appointed pain--
   God made us rich and poor--of what do these complain?"

   MRS. NORTON'S "CHILD OF THE ISLANDS."


The next evening it was a warm, pattering, incessant rain, just the
rain to waken up the flowers. But in Manchester, where, alas! there
are no flowers, the rain had only a disheartening and gloomy effect;
the streets were wet and dirty, the drippings from the houses were
wet and dirty, and the people were wet and dirty. Indeed, most kept
within-doors; and there was an unusual silence of footsteps in the
little paved courts.

Mary had to change her clothes after her walk home; and had hardly
settled herself before she heard some one fumbling at the door. The
noise continued long enough to allow her to get up, and go and open
it. There stood--could it be? yes it was, her father!

Drenched and way-worn, there he stood! He came in with no word to
Mary in return for her cheery and astonished greeting. He sat down by
the fire in his wet things, unheeding. But Mary would not let him so
rest. She ran up and brought down his working-day clothes, and went
into the pantry to rummage up their little bit of provision while
he changed by the fire, talking all the while as gaily as she could,
though her father's depression hung like lead on her heart.

For Mary, in her seclusion at Miss Simmonds',--where the chief talk
was of fashions, and dress, and parties to be given, for which such
and such gowns would be wanted, varied with a slight whispered
interlude occasionally about love and lovers,--had not heard the
political news of the day: that Parliament had refused to listen to
the working-men, when they petitioned with all the force of their
rough, untutored words to be heard concerning the distress which was
riding, like the Conqueror on his Pale Horse, among the people; which
was crushing their lives out of them, and stamping woe-marks over the
land.

When he had eaten and was refreshed, they sat in silence for some
time; for Mary wished him to tell her what oppressed him so, yet
durst not ask. In this she was wise; for when we are heavy laden in
our hearts, it falls in better with our humour to reveal our case in
our own way, and our own time.

Mary sat on a stool at her father's feet in old childish guise, and
stole her hand into his, while his sadness infected her, and she
"caught the trick of grief, and sighed," she knew not why.

"Mary, we mun speak to our God to hear us, for man will not hearken;
no, not now, when we weep tears o' blood."

In an instant Mary understood the fact, if not the details, that so
weighed down her father's heart. She pressed his hand with silent
sympathy. She did not know what to say, and was so afraid of speaking
wrongly, that she was silent. But when his attitude had remained
unchanged for more than half-an-hour, his eyes gazing vacantly and
fixedly at the fire, no sound but now and then a deep drawn sigh to
break the weary ticking of the clock, and the drip-drop from the roof
without, Mary could bear it no longer. Any thing to rouse her father.
Even bad news.

"Father, do you know George Wilson's dead?" (Her hand was suddenly
and almost violently compressed.) "He dropped down dead in Oxford
Road yester morning. It's very sad, isn't it, father?"

Her tears were ready to flow as she looked up in her father's face
for sympathy. Still the same fixed look of despair, not varied by
grief for the dead.

"Best for him to die," he said, in a low voice.

This was unbearable. Mary got up under pretence of going to tell
Margaret that she need not come to sleep with her to-night, but
really to ask Job Legh to come and cheer her father.

She stopped outside their door. Margaret was practising her singing,
and through the still night air her voice rang out like that of an
angel.

"Comfort ye, comfort ye, my people, saith your God."

The old Hebrew prophetic words fell like dew on Mary's heart. She
could not interrupt. She stood listening and "comforted," till the
little buzz of conversation again began, and then entered and told
her errand.

Both grandfather and grand-daughter rose instantly to fulfil her
request.

"He's just tired out, Mary," said old Job. "He'll be a different man
to-morrow."

There is no describing the looks and tones that have power over an
aching, heavy laden heart; but in an hour or so John Barton was
talking away as freely as ever, though all his talk ran, as was
natural, on the disappointment of his fond hope, of the forlorn hope
of many.

"Ay, London's a fine place," said he, "and finer folk live in it than
I ever thought on, or ever heerd tell on except in th' story-books.
They are having their good things now, that afterwards they may be
tormented."

Still at the old parable of Dives and Lazarus! Does it haunt the
minds of the rich as it does those of the poor?

"Do tell us all about London, dear father," asked Mary, who was
sitting at her old post by her father's knee.

"How can I tell yo a' about it, when I never seed one-tenth of it.
It's as big as six Manchesters, they telled me. One-sixth may be made
up o' grand palaces, and three-sixths o' middling kind, and th' rest
o' holes o' iniquity and filth, such as Manchester knows nought on,
I'm glad to say."

"Well, father, but did you see th' Queen?"

"I believe I didn't, though one day I thought I'd seen her many a
time. You see," said he, turning to Job Legh, "there were a day
appointed for us to go to Parliament House. We were most on us biding
at a public-house in Holborn, where they did very well for us. Th'
morning of taking our petition we'd such a spread for breakfast as
th' Queen hersel might ha' sitten down to. I suppose they thought
we wanted putting in heart. There were mutton kidneys, and sausages,
and broiled ham, and fried beef and onions; more like a dinner nor
a breakfast. Many on our chaps though, I could see, could eat but
little. Th' food stuck in their throats when they thought o' them
at home, wives and little ones, as had, may be at that very time,
nought to eat. Well, after breakfast, we were all set to walk in
procession, and a time it took to put us in order, two and two, and
the petition as was yards long, carried by th' foremost pairs. The
men looked grave enough, yo may be sure; and such a set of thin, wan,
wretched-looking chaps as they were!"

"Yourself is none to boast on."

"Ay, but I were fat and rosy to many a one. Well, we walked on and
on through many a street, much the same as Deansgate. We had to walk
slowly, slowly, for th' carriages an' cabs as thronged th' streets.
I thought by-and-bye we should may be get clear on 'em, but as th'
streets grew wider they grew worse, and at last we were fairly
blocked up at Oxford Street. We getten across at last though, and my
eyes! the grand streets we were in then! They're sadly puzzled how
to build houses though in London; there'd be an opening for a good
steady master-builder there, as know'd his business. For yo see the
houses are many on 'em built without any proper shape for a body
to live in; some on 'em they've after thought would fall down, so
they've stuck great ugly pillars out before 'em. And some on 'em (we
thought they must be th' tailor's sign) had getten stone men and
women as wanted clothes stuck on 'em. I were like a child, I forgot
a' my errand in looking about me. By this it were dinner-time, or
better, as we could tell by th' sun, right above our heads, and we
were dusty and tired, going a step now and a step then. Well, at
last we getten into a street grander nor all, leading to th' Queen's
palace, and there it were I thought I saw th' Queen. Yo've seen th'
hearses wi' white plumes, Job?"

Job assented.

"Well, them undertaker folk are driving a pretty trade in London.
Wellnigh every lady we saw in a carriage had hired one o' them plumes
for the day, and had it niddle noddling on her head. It were th'
Queen's Drawing-room, they said, and th' carriages went bowling along
toward her house, some wi' dressed up gentlemen like circus folk in
'em, and rucks [28] o' ladies in others. Carriages themselves were
great shakes too. Some o' th' gentlemen as couldn't get inside hung
on behind, wi' nosegays to smell at, and sticks to keep off folk as
might splash their silk stockings. I wondered why they didn't hire a
cab rather than hang on like a whip-behind boy; but I suppose they
wished to keep wi' their wives, Darby and Joan like. Coachmen were
little squat men, wi' wigs like th' oud fashioned parsons. Well, we
could na get on for these carriages, though we waited and waited.
Th' horses were too fat to move quick; they'n never known want o'
food, one might tell by their sleek coats; and police pushed us
back when we tried to cross. One or two on 'em struck wi' their
sticks, and coachmen laughed, and some officers as stood nigh put
their spy-glasses in their eye, and left 'em sticking there like
mountebanks. One o' th' police struck me. 'Whatten business have yo
to do that?' said I.


   [Footnote 28: "Rucks," a great quantity.]


"'You're frightening them horses,' says he, in his mincing way (for
Londoners are mostly all tongue-tied, and can't say their a's and
i's properly), 'and it's our business to keep you from molesting the
ladies and gentlemen going to her Majesty's Drawing-room.'

"'And why are we to be molested?' asked I, 'going decently about
our business, which is life and death to us, and many a little one
clemming at home in Lancashire? Which business is of most consequence
i' the sight o' God, think yo, our'n or them gran ladies and
gentlemen as yo think so much on?'

"But I might as well ha' held my peace, for he only laughed."

John ceased. After waiting a little to see if he would go on of
himself, Job said,

"Well, but that's not a' your story, man. Tell us what happened when
yo got to th' Parliament House."

After a little pause John answered,

"If yo please, neighbour, I'd rather say nought about that. It's not
to be forgotten or forgiven either by me or many another; but I canna
tell of our down-casting just as a piece of London news. As long as
I live, our rejection that day will bide in my heart; and as long as
I live I shall curse them as so cruelly refused to hear us; but I'll
not speak of it no [29] more."


   [Footnote 29: A similar use of a double negative is not
                 unfrequent in Chaucer; as in the "Miller's Tale":
                     "That of no wife toke he non offering
                     For curtesie, he sayd, he n'old non."]


So, daunted in their inquiries, they sat silent for a few minutes.

Old Job, however, felt that some one must speak, else all the good
they had done in dispelling John Barton's gloom was lost. So after
awhile he thought of a subject, neither sufficiently dissonant from
the last to jar on the full heart, nor too much the same to cherish
the continuance of the gloomy train of thought.

"Did you ever hear tell," said he to Mary, "that I were in London
once?"

"No!" said she, with surprise, and looking at Job with increased
respect.

"Ay, but I were though, and Peg there too, though she minds nought
about it, poor wench! You must know I had but one child, and she were
Margaret's mother. I loved her above a bit, and one day when she
came (standing behind me for that I should not see her blushes, and
stroking my cheeks in her own coaxing way), and told me she and Frank
Jennings (as was a joiner lodging near us) should be so happy if they
were married, I could not find in my heart t' say her nay, though I
went sick at the thought of losing her away from my home. Howe'er,
she were my only child, and I never said nought of what I felt, for
fear o' grieving her young heart. But I tried to think o' the time
when I'd been young mysel, and had loved her blessed mother, and how
we'd left father and mother and gone out into th' world together,
and I'm now right thankful I held my peace, and didna fret her wi'
telling her how sore I was at parting wi' her that were the light o'
my eyes."

"But," said Mary, "you said the young man were a neighbour."

"Ay, so he were; and his father afore him. But work were rather slack
in Manchester, and Frank's uncle sent him word o' London work and
London wages, so he were to go there; and it were there Margaret was
to follow him. Well, my heart aches yet at thought of those days.
She so happy, and he so happy; only the poor father as fretted sadly
behind their backs. They were married, and stayed some days wi' me
afore setting off; and I've often thought sin' Margaret's heart
failed her many a time those few days, and she would fain ha' spoken;
but I knew fra' mysel it were better to keep it pent up, and I never
let on what I were feeling. I knew what she meant when she came
kissing, and holding my hand, and all her old childish ways o' loving
me. Well, they went at last. You know them two letters, Margaret?"

"Yes, sure," replied his grand-daughter.

"Well, them two were the only letters I ever had fra' her, poor lass.
She said in them she were very happy, and I believe she were. And
Frank's family heard he were in good work. In one o' her letters,
poor thing, she ends wi' saying, 'Farewell, Grandad!' wi' a line
drawn under grandad, and fra' that an' other hints I knew she were in
th' family way; and I said nought, but I screwed up a little money,
thinking come Whitsuntide I'd take a holiday and go and see her an'
th' little one. But one day towards Whitsuntide comed Jennings wi' a
grave face, and says he, 'I hear our Frank and your Margaret's both
getten the fever.' You might ha' knocked me down wi' a straw, for
it seemed as if God told me what th' upshot would be. Old Jennings
had gotten a letter, yo see, fra' the landlady they lodged wi'; a
well-penned letter, asking if they'd no friends to come and nurse
them. She'd caught it first, and Frank, who was as tender o' her as
her own mother could ha' been, had nursed her till he'd caught it
himsel; and she expecting her down-lying [30] every day. Well, t'
make a long story short, Old Jennings and I went up by that night's
coach. So you see, Mary, that was the way I got to London."


   [Footnote 30: "Down-lying," lying-in.]


"But how was your daughter when you got there?" asked Mary,
anxiously.

"She were at rest, poor wench, and so were Frank. I guessed as much
when I see'd th' landlady's face, all swelled wi' crying, when she
opened th' door to us. We said, 'Where are they?' and I knew they
were dead, fra' her look; but Jennings didn't, as I take it; for
when she showed us into a room wi' a white sheet on th' bed, and
underneath it, plain to be seen, two still figures, he screeched out
as if he'd been a woman.

"Yet he'd other childer and I'd none. There lay my darling, my only
one. She were dead, and there were no one to love me, no, not one. I
disremember [31] rightly what I did; but I know I were very quiet,
while my heart were crushed within me.


   [Footnote 31: "Disremember," forget.]


"Jennings could na' stand being in th' room at all, so th' landlady
took him down, and I were glad to be alone. It grew dark while I sat
there; and at last th' landlady come up again, and said, 'Come here.'
So I got up and walked into th' light, but I had to hold by th'
stair-rails, I were so weak and dizzy. She led me into a room, where
Jennings lay on a sofa fast asleep, wi' his pocket handkercher over
his head for a night-cap. She said he'd cried himself fairly off
to sleep. There were tea on th' table all ready; for she were a
kind-hearted body. But she still said, 'Come here,' and took hold o'
my arm. So I went round the table, and there were a clothes-basket by
th' fire, wi' a shawl put o'er it. 'Lift that up,' says she, and I
did; and there lay a little wee babby fast asleep. My heart gave a
leap, and th' tears comed rushing into my eyes first time that day.
'Is it hers?' said I, though I knew it were. 'Yes,' said she. 'She
were getting a bit better o' the fever, and th' babby were born; and
then the poor young man took worse and died, and she were not many
hours behind.'

"Little mite of a thing! and yet it seemed her angel come back to
comfort me. I were quite jealous o' Jennings whenever he went near
the babby. I thought it were more my flesh and blood than his'n, and
yet I were afeared he would claim it. However, that were far enough
fra' his thoughts; he'd plenty other childer, and as I found out at
after he'd all along been wishing me to take it. Well, we buried
Margaret and her husband in a big, crowded, lonely churchyard in
London. I were loath to leave them there, as I thought, when they
rose again, they'd feel so strange at first away fra Manchester, and
all old friends; but it couldna be helped. Well, God watches o'er
their grave there as well as here. That funeral cost a mint o' money,
but Jennings and I wished to do th' thing decent. Then we'd the stout
little babby to bring home. We'd not overmuch money left; but it were
fine weather, and we thought we'd take th' coach to Brummagem, and
walk on. It were a bright May morning when last I saw London town,
looking back from a big hill a mile or two off. And in that big mass
o' a place I were leaving my blessed child asleep--in her last sleep.
Well, God's will be done! She's gotten to heaven afore me; but I
shall get there at last, please God, though it's a long while first.

"The babby had been fed afore we set out, and th' coach moving kept
it asleep, bless its little heart. But when th' coach stopped for
dinner it were awake, and crying for its pobbies. [32] So we asked
for some bread and milk, and Jennings took it first for to feed it;
but it made its mouth like a square, and let it run out at each o'
th' four corners. 'Shake it, Jennings,' says I; 'that's the way they
make water run through a funnel, when it's o'er full; and a child's
mouth is broad end o' th' funnel, and th' gullet the narrow one.' So
he shook it, but it only cried th' more. 'Let me have it,' says I,
thinking he were an awkward oud chap. But it were just as bad wi' me.
By shaking th' babby we got better nor a gill into its mouth, but
more nor that came up again, wetting a' th' nice dry clothes landlady
had put on. Well, just as we'd gotten to th' dinner-table, and helped
oursels, and eaten two mouthful, came in th' guard, and a fine chap
wi' a sample o' calico flourishing in his hand. 'Coach is ready!'
says one; 'Half-a-crown your dinner!' says th' other. Well, we
thought it a deal for both our dinners, when we'd hardly tasted 'em;
but, bless your life, it were half-a-crown apiece, and a shilling
for th' bread and milk as were possetted all over babby's clothes.
We spoke up again [33] it; but every body said it were the rule, so
what could two poor oud chaps like us do again it? Well, poor babby
cried without stopping to take breath, fra' that time till we got
to Brummagem for the night. My heart ached for th' little thing. It
caught wi' its wee mouth at our coat sleeves and at our mouths, when
we tried t' comfort it by talking to it. Poor little wench! It wanted
its mammy, as were lying cold in th' grave. 'Well,' says I, 'it'll
be clemmed to death, if it lets out its supper as it did its dinner.
Let's get some woman to feed it; it comes natural to women to do for
babbies.' So we asked th' chamber-maid at the inn, and she took quite
kindly to it; and we got a good supper, and grew rare and sleepy,
what wi' th' warmth, and wi' our long ride i' th' open air. Th'
chamber-maid said she would like t' have it t' sleep wi' her, only
missis would scold so; but it looked so quiet and smiling like, as it
lay in her arms, that we thought 'twould be no trouble to have it wi'
us. I says: 'See, Jennings, how women-folk do quieten babbies; it's
just as I said.' He looked grave; he were always thoughtful-looking,
though I never heard him say any thing very deep. At last says he--


   [Footnote 32: "Pobbies," or "pobs," child's porridge.]

   [Footnote 33: "Again," for against. "He that is not with me,
                 he is ageyn me."--_Wickliffe's Version._]


"'Young woman! have you gotten a spare night-cap?'

"'Missis always keeps night-caps for gentlemen as does not like to
unpack,' says she, rather quick.

"'Ay, but young woman, it's one of your night-caps I want. Th' babby
seems to have taken a mind to yo; and may be in th' dark it might
take me for yo if I'd getten your night-cap on.'

"The chambermaid smirked and went for a cap, but I laughed outright
at th' oud bearded chap thinking he'd make hissel like a woman just
by putting on a woman's cap. Howe'er he'd not be laughed out on't, so
I held th' babby till he were in bed. Such a night as we had on it!
Babby began to scream o' th' oud fashion, and we took it turn and
turn about to sit up and rock it. My heart were very sore for th'
little one, as it groped about wi' its mouth; but for a' that I could
scarce keep fra' smiling at th' thought o' us two oud chaps, th' one
wi' a woman's night-cap on, sitting on our hinder ends for half th'
night, hushabying a babby as wouldn't be hushabied. Toward morning,
poor little wench! it fell asleep, fairly tired out wi' crying, but
even in its sleep it gave such pitiful sobs, quivering up fra' the
very bottom of its little heart, that once or twice I almost wished
it lay on its mother's breast, at peace for ever. Jennings fell
asleep too; but I began for to reckon up our money. It were little
enough we had left, our dinner the day afore had ta'en so much. I
didn't know what our reckoning would be for that night lodging, and
supper, and breakfast. Doing a sum alway sent me asleep ever sin' I
were a lad; so I fell sound in a short time, and were only wakened by
chambermaid tapping at th' door, to say she'd dress the babby afore
her missis were up if we liked. But bless yo', we'd never thought o'
undressing it th' night afore, and now it were sleeping so sound, and
we were so glad o' the peace and quietness, that we thought it were
no good to waken it up to screech again.

"Well! (there's Mary asleep for a good listener!) I suppose you're
getting weary of my tale, so I'll not be long over ending it. Th'
reckoning left us very bare, and we thought we'd best walk home,
for it were only sixty mile, they telled us, and not stop again for
nought, save victuals. So we left Brummagem, (which is as black a
place as Manchester, without looking so like home), and walked a'
that day, carrying babby turn and turn about. It were well fed by
chambermaid afore we left, and th' day were fine, and folk began to
have some knowledge o' th' proper way o' speaking, and we were more
cheery at thoughts o' home (though mine, God knows, were lonesome
enough). We stopped none for dinner, but at baggin-time [34] we
getten a good meal at a public-house, an' fed th' babby as well as
we could, but that were but poorly. We got a crust too, for it to
suck--chambermaid put us up to that. That night, whether we were
tired or whatten, I don't know, but it were dree [35] work, and poor
wench had slept out her sleep, and began th' cry as wore my heart out
again. Says Jennings, says he,


   [Footnote 34: "Baggin-time," time of the evening meal.]

   [Footnote 35: "Dree," long and tedious. Anglo-Saxon, "dreogan,"
                 to suffer, to endure.]


"'We should na ha' set out so like gentlefolk a top o' the coach
yesterday.'

"'Nay, lad! We should ha' had more to walk, if we had na ridden, and
I'm sure both you and I'se [36] weary o' tramping.'


   [Footnote 36: "I have not been, nor _is_, nor never
                 schal."--_Wickliffe's "Apology," p. 1._]


"So he were quiet a bit. But he were one o' them as were sure to find
out somewhat had been done amiss, when there were no going back to
undo it. So presently he coughs, as if he were going to speak, and
I says to mysel, 'At it again, my lad.' Says he,

"'I ax pardon, neighbour, but it strikes me it would ha' been better
for my son if he had never begun to keep company wi' your daughter.'

"Well! that put me up, and my heart got very full, and but that I
were carrying _her_ babby, I think I should ha' struck him. At last
I could hold in no longer, and says I,

"'Better say at once it would ha' been better for God never to ha'
made th' world, for then we'd never ha' been in it, to have had th'
heavy hearts we have now.'

"Well! he said that were rank blasphemy; but I thought his way of
casting up again th' events God had pleased to send, were worse
blasphemy. Howe'er, I said nought more angry, for th' little babby's
sake, as were th' child o' his dead son, as well as o' my dead
daughter.

"Th' longest lane will have a turning, and that night came to an end
at last; and we were foot-sore and tired enough, and to my mind th'
babby were getting weaker and weaker, and it wrung my heart to hear
its little wail; I'd ha' given my right hand for one of yesterday's
hearty cries. We were wanting our breakfasts, and so were it too,
motherless babby! We could see no public-house, so about six o'clock
(only we thought it were later) we stopped at a cottage where a woman
were moving about near th' open door. Says I, 'Good woman, may we
rest us a bit?' 'Come in,' says she, wiping a chair, as looked bright
enough afore, wi' her apron. It were a cheery, clean room; and we
were glad to sit down again, though I thought my legs would never
bend at th' knees. In a minute she fell a noticing th' babby, and
took it in her arms, and kissed it again and again. 'Missis,' says I,
'we're not without money, and if yo'd give us somewhat for breakfast,
we'd pay yo honest, and if yo would wash and dress that poor babby,
and get some pobbies down its throat, for it's well-nigh clemmed, I'd
pray for yo' till my dying day.' So she said nought, but gived me th'
babby back, and afore yo' could say Jack Robinson, she'd a pan on th'
fire, and bread and cheese on th' table. When she turned round, her
face looked red, and her lips were tight pressed together. Well! we
were right down glad on our breakfast, and God bless and reward that
woman for her kindness that day; she fed th' poor babby as gently
and softly, and spoke to it as tenderly as its own poor mother could
ha' done. It seemed as if that stranger and it had known each other
afore, maybe in Heaven, where folk's spirits come from they say; th'
babby looked up so lovingly in her eyes, and made little noises more
like a dove than aught else. Then she undressed it (poor darling! it
were time), touching it so softly; and washed it from head to foot,
and as many on its things were dirty; and what bits o' things its
mother had gotten ready for it had been sent by th' carrier fra
London, she put 'em aside; and wrapping little naked babby in her
apron, she pulled out a key, as were fastened to a black ribbon, and
hung down her breast, and unlocked a drawer in th' dresser. I were
sorry to be prying, but I could na' help seeing in that drawer some
little child's clothes, all strewed wi' lavendar, and lying by 'em
a little whip an' a broken rattle. I began to have an insight into
that woman's heart then. She took out a thing or two; and locked the
drawer, and went on dressing babby. Just about then come her husband
down, a great big fellow as didn't look half awake, though it were
getting late; but he'd heard all as had been said down-stairs, as
were plain to be seen; but he were a gruff chap. We'd finished our
breakfast, and Jennings were looking hard at th' woman as she were
getting the babby to sleep wi' a sort of rocking way. At length says
he, 'I ha learnt th' way now; it's two jiggits and a shake, two
jiggits and a shake. I can get that babby asleep now mysel.'

"The man had nodded cross enough to us, and had gone to th' door, and
stood there whistling wi' his hands in his breeches-pockets, looking
abroad. But at last he turns and says, quite sharp,

"'I say, missis, I'm to have no breakfast to-day, I s'pose.'

"So wi' that she kissed th' child, a long, soft kiss; and looking in
my face to see if I could take her meaning, gave me th' babby without
a word. I were loath to stir, but I saw it were better to go. So
giving Jennings a sharp nudge (for he'd fallen asleep), I says,
'Missis, what's to pay?' pulling out my money wi' a jingle that she
might na guess we were at all bare o' cash. So she looks at her
husband, who said ne'er a word, but were listening wi' all his ears
nevertheless; and when she saw he would na say, she said, hesitating,
as if pulled two ways, by her fear o' him, 'Should you think sixpence
over much?' It were so different to public-house reckoning, for we'd
eaten a main deal afore the chap came down. So says I, 'And, missis,
what should we gie you for the babby's bread and milk?' (I had it
once in my mind to say 'and for a' your trouble with it,' but my
heart would na let me say it, for I could read in her ways how it had
been a work o' love.) So says she, quite quick, and stealing a look
at her husband's back, as looked all ear, if ever a back did, 'Oh, we
could take nought for the little babby's food, if it had eaten twice
as much, bless it.' Wi' that he looked at her; such a scowling look!
She knew what he meant, and stepped softly across the floor to him,
and put her hand on his arm. He seem'd as though he'd shake it off
by a jerk on his elbow, but she said quite low, 'For poor little
Johnnie's sake, Richard.' He did not move or speak again, and after
looking in his face for a minute, she turned away, swallowing deep in
her throat. She kissed th' sleeping babby as she passed, when I paid
her. To quieten th' gruff husband, and stop him if he rated her, I
could na help slipping another sixpence under th' loaf, and then we
set off again. Last look I had o' that woman she were quietly wiping
her eyes wi' the corner of her apron, as she went about her husband's
breakfast. But I shall know her in heaven."

He stopped to think of that long-ago May morning, when he had carried
his grand-daughter under the distant hedge-rows and beneath the
flowering sycamores.

"There's nought more to say, wench," said he to Margaret, as she
begged him to go on. "That night we reached Manchester, and I'd found
out that Jennings would be glad enough to give up babby to me, so I
took her home at once, and a blessing she's been to me."

They were all silent for a few minutes; each following out the
current of their thoughts. Then, almost simultaneously, their
attention fell upon Mary. Sitting on her little stool, her head
resting on her father's knee, and sleeping as soundly as any infant,
her breath (still like an infant's) came and went as softly as a bird
steals to her leafy nest. Her half-open mouth was as scarlet as the
winter-berries, and contrasted finely with the clear paleness of
her complexion, where the eloquent blood flushed carnation at each
motion. Her black eye-lashes lay on the delicate cheek, which was
still more shaded by the masses of her golden hair, that seemed to
form a nest-like pillow for her as she lay. Her father in fond pride
straightened one glossy curl, for an instant, as if to display its
length and silkiness. The little action awoke her, and, like nine out
of ten people in similar circumstances, she exclaimed, opening her
eyes to their fullest extent,

"I'm not asleep. I've been awake all the time."

Even her father could not keep from smiling, and Job Legh and
Margaret laughed outright.

"Come, wench," said Job, "don't look so gloppened [37] because
thou'st fallen asleep while an oud chap like me was talking on oud
times. It were like enough to send thee to sleep. Try if thou canst
keep thine eyes open while I read thy father a bit on a poem as is
written by a weaver like oursel. A rare chap I'll be bound is he who
could weave verse like this."


   [Footnote 37: "Gloppened," amazed, frightened.]


So adjusting his spectacles on nose, cocking his chin, crossing his
legs, and coughing to clear his voice, he read aloud a little poem of
Samuel Bamford's [38] he had picked up somewhere.


   [Footnote 38: The fine-spirited author of "Passages in the Life
                 of a Radical"--a man who illustrates his order,
                 and shows what nobility may be in a cottage.]


   God help the poor, who, on this wintry morn,
     Come forth from alleys dim and courts obscure.
   God help yon poor pale girl, who droops forlorn,
     And meekly her affliction doth endure;
   God help her, outcast lamb; she trembling stands,
   All wan her lips, and frozen red her hands;
   Her sunken eyes are modestly down-cast,
   Her night-black hair streams on the fitful blast;
   Her bosom, passing fair, is half revealed,
   And oh! so cold, the snow lies there congealed;
   Her feet benumbed, her shoes all rent and worn,
   God help thee, outcast lamb, who standst forlorn!
         God help the poor!

   God help the poor! An infant's feeble wail
     Comes from yon narrow gateway, and behold!
   A female crouching there, so deathly pale,
     Huddling her child, to screen it from the cold;
   Her vesture scant, her bonnet crushed and torn;
     A thin shawl doth her baby dear enfold:
   And so she 'bides the ruthless gale of morn,
     Which almost to her heart hath sent its cold.
   And now she, sudden, darts a ravening look,
   As one, with new hot bread, goes past the nook;
   And, as the tempting load is onward borne,
   She weeps. God help thee, helpless one, forlorn!
         God help the poor!

   God help the poor! Behold yon famished lad,
     No shoes, nor hose, his wounded feet protect;
   With limping gait, and looks so dreamy sad,
     He wanders onward, stopping to inspect
   Each window, stored with articles of food.
     He yearns but to enjoy one cheering meal;
   Oh! to the hungry palate, viands rude,
     Would yield a zest the famished only feel!
   He now devours a crust of mouldy bread;
     With teeth and hands the precious boon is torn;
   Unmindful of the storm that round his head
     Impetuous sweeps. God help thee, child forlorn!
         God help the poor!

   God help the poor! Another have I found--
     A bowed and venerable man is he;
   His slouched hat with faded crape is bound;
     His coat is gray, and threadbare too, I see.
   "The rude winds" seem "to mock his hoary hair;"
   His shirtless bosom to the blast is bare.
   Anon he turns and casts a wistful eye,
     And with scant napkin wipes the blinding spray;
   And looks around, as if he fain would spy
     Friends he had feasted in his better day:
   Ah! some are dead; and some have long forborne
   To know the poor; and he is left forlorn!
         God help the poor!

   God help the poor, who in lone valleys dwell,
     Or by far hills, where whin and heather grow;
   Theirs is a story sad indeed to tell,
     Yet little cares the world, and less 't would know
     About the toil and want men undergo.
   The wearying loom doth call them up at morn,
     They work till worn-out nature sinks to sleep,
     They taste, but are not fed. The snow drifts deep
     Around the fireless cot, and blocks the door;
     The night-storm howls a dirge across the moor;
   And shall they perish thus--oppressed and lorn?
   Shall toil and famine, hopeless, still be borne?
     No! God will yet arise, and help the poor.

"Amen!" said Barton, solemnly, and sorrowfully. "Mary! wench, couldst
thou copy me them lines, dost think?--that's to say, if Job there has
no objection."

"Not I. More they're heard and read and the better, say I."

So Mary took the paper. And the next day, on the blank half sheet
of a valentine, all bordered with hearts and darts--a valentine she
had once suspected to come from Jem Wilson--she copied Bamford's
beautiful little poem.




CHAPTER X.

RETURN OF THE PRODIGAL.


   "My heart, once soft as woman's tear, is gnarled
   With gloating on the ills I cannot cure."

   ELLIOTT.

   "Then guard and shield her innocence,
     Let her not fall like me;
   'Twere better, Oh! a thousand times,
     She in her grave should be."

   "THE OUTCAST."


Despair settled down like a heavy cloud; and now and then, through
the dead calm of sufferings, came pipings of stormy winds,
foretelling the end of these dark prognostics. In times of sorrowful
or fierce endurance, we are often soothed by the mere repetition of
old proverbs which tell the experience of our forefathers; but now,
"it's a long lane that has no turning," "the weariest day draws to an
end," &c., seemed false and vain sayings, so long and so weary was
the pressure of the terrible times. Deeper and deeper still sank the
poor; it showed how much lingering suffering it takes to kill men,
that so few (in comparison) died during those times. But remember! we
only miss those who do men's work in their humble sphere; the aged,
the feeble, the children, when they die, are hardly noted by the
world; and yet to many hearts, their deaths make a blank which long
years will never fill up. Remember, too, that though it may take much
suffering to kill the able-bodied and effective members of society,
it does _not_ take much to reduce them to worn, listless, diseased
creatures, who thenceforward crawl through life with moody hearts and
pain-stricken bodies.

The people had thought the poverty of the preceding years hard to
bear, and had found its yoke heavy; but this year added sorely to
its weight. Former times had chastised them with whips, but this
chastised them with scorpions.

Of course, Barton had his share of mere bodily sufferings. Before he
had gone up to London on his vain errand, he had been working short
time. But in the hopes of speedy redress by means of the interference
of Parliament, he had thrown up his place; and now, when he asked
leave to resume work, he was told they were diminishing their number
of hands every week, and he was made aware by the remarks of fellow
workmen, that a Chartist delegate, and a leading member of a Trades'
Union, was not likely to be favoured in his search after employment.
Still he tried to keep up a brave heart concerning himself. He knew
he could bear hunger; for that power of endurance had been called
forth when he was a little child, and had seen his mother hide her
daily morsel to share it among her children, and when he, being the
eldest, had told the noble lie, that "he was not hungry, could not
eat a bit more," in order to imitate his mother's bravery, and still
the sharp wail of the younger infants. Mary, too, was secure of two
meals a day at Miss Simmonds'; though, by the way, the dress-maker,
too, feeling the effect of bad times, had left off giving tea to her
apprentices, setting them the example of long abstinence by putting
off her own meal until work was done for the night, however late that
might be.

But the rent! It was half-a-crown a week--nearly all Mary's
earnings--and much less room might do for them, only two.--(Now came
the time to be thankful that the early dead were saved from the evil
to come.)--The agricultural labourer generally has strong local
attachments; but they are far less common, almost obliterated, among
the inhabitants of a town. Still there are exceptions, and Barton
formed one. He had removed to his present house just after the last
bad times, when little Tom had sickened and died. He had then thought
the bustle of a removal would give his poor stunned wife something to
do, and he had taken more interest in the details of the proceeding
than he otherwise would have done, in the hope of calling her forth
to action again. So he seemed to know every brass-headed nail driven
up for her convenience. One only had been displaced. It was Esther's
bonnet nail, which, in his deep revengeful anger against her, after
his wife's death, he had torn out of the wall, and cast into the
street. It would be hard work to leave that house, which yet seemed
hallowed by his wife's presence in the happy days of old. But he
was a law unto himself, though sometimes a bad, fierce law; and
he resolved to give the rent-collector notice, and look out for a
cheaper abode, and tell Mary they must flit. Poor Mary! she loved the
house, too. It was wrenching up her natural feelings of home, for it
would be long before the fibres of her heart would gather themselves
about another place.

This trial was spared. The collector (of himself), on the very Monday
when Barton planned to give him notice of his intention to leave,
lowered the rent threepence a week, just enough to make Barton
compromise and agree to stay on a little longer.

But by degrees the house was stripped of its little ornaments. Some
were broken; and the odd twopences and threepences wanted to pay for
their repairs, were required for the far sterner necessity of food.
And by-and-bye Mary began to part with other superfluities at the
pawn-shop. The smart tea-tray and tea-caddy, long and carefully kept,
went for bread for her father. He did not ask for it, or complain,
but she saw hunger in his shrunk, fierce, animal look. Then the
blankets went, for it was summer time, and they could spare them; and
their sale made a fund, which Mary fancied would last till better
times came. But it was soon all gone; and then she looked around
the room to crib it of its few remaining ornaments. To all these
proceedings her father said never a word. If he fasted, or feasted
(after the sale of some article), on an unusual meal of bread and
cheese, he took all with a sullen indifference, which depressed
Mary's heart. She often wished he would apply for relief from the
Guardian's relieving office; often wondered the Trades' Union did
nothing for him. Once when she asked him as he sat, grimed, unshaven,
and gaunt, after a day's fasting over the fire, why he did not get
relief from the town, he turned round, with grim wrath, and said, "I
don't want money, child! D----n their charity and their money! I want
work, and it is my right. I want work."

He would bear it all, he said to himself. And he did bear it, but
not meekly; that was too much to expect. Real meekness of character
is called out by experience of kindness. And few had been kind to
him. Yet through it all, with stern determination he refused the
assistance his Trades' Union would have given him. It had not much
to give, but with worldly wisdom, thought it better to propitiate
an active, useful member, than to help those who were unenergetic,
though they had large families to provide for. Not so thought John
Barton. With him need was right.

"Give it to Tom Darbyshire," he said. "He's more claim on it than me,
for he's more need of it, with his seven children."

Now Tom Darbyshire was, in his listless, grumbling way, a backbiting
enemy of John Barton's. And he knew it; but he was not to be
influenced by that in a matter like this.

Mary went early to her work; but her cheery laugh over it was now
missed by the other girls. Her mind wandered over the present
distress, and then settled, as she stitched, on the visions of the
future, where yet her thoughts dwelt more on the circumstances of
ease, and the pomps and vanities awaiting her, than on the lover
with whom she was to share them. Still she was not insensible to the
pride of having attracted one so far above herself in station; not
insensible to the secret pleasure of knowing that he, whom so many
admired, had often said he would give any thing for one of her sweet
smiles. Her love for him was a bubble, blown out of vanity; but it
looked very real and very bright. Sally Leadbitter, meanwhile, keenly
observed the signs of the times; she found out that Mary had begun to
affix a stern value to money as the "Purchaser of Life," and many
girls had been dazzled and lured by gold, even without the betraying
love which she believed to exist in Mary's heart. So she urged young
Mr. Carson, by representations of the want she was sure surrounded
Mary, to bring matters more to a point. But he had a kind of
instinctive dread of hurting Mary's pride of spirit, and durst not
hint his knowledge in any way of the distress that many must be
enduring. He felt that for the present he must still be content
with stolen meetings and summer evening strolls, and the delight of
pouring sweet honeyed words into her ear, while she listened with
a blush and a smile that made her look radiant with beauty. No,
he would be cautious in order to be certain; for Mary, one way or
another, he must make his. He had no doubt of the effect of his own
personal charms in the long run; for he knew he was handsome, and
believed himself fascinating.

If he had known what Mary's home was, he would not have been so much
convinced of his increasing influence over her, by her being more and
more ready to linger with him in the sweet summer air. For when she
returned for the night her father was often out, and the house wanted
the cheerful look it had had in the days when money was never wanted
to purchase soap and brushes, black-lead and pipe-clay. It was dingy
and comfortless; for, of course, there was not even the dumb familiar
home-friend, a fire. And Margaret, too, was now so often from home,
singing at some of those grand places. And Alice; oh, Mary wished
she had never left her cellar to go and live at Ancoats with her
sister-in-law. For in that matter Mary felt very guilty; she had put
off and put off going to see the widow after George Wilson's death
from dread of meeting Jem, or giving him reason to think she wished
to be as intimate with him as formerly; and now she was so much
ashamed of her delay that she was likely never to go at all.

If her father was at home it was no better; indeed it was worse. He
seldom spoke, less than ever; and often when he did speak they were
sharp angry words, such as he had never given her formerly. Her
temper was high, too, and her answers not over-mild; and once in his
passion he had even beaten her. If Sally Leadbitter or Mr. Carson had
been at hand at that moment, Mary would have been ready to leave home
for ever. She sat alone, after her father had flung out of the house,
bitterly thinking on the days that were gone; angry with her own
hastiness, and believing that her father did not love her; striving
to heap up one painful thought on another. Who cared for her? Mr.
Carson might, but in this grief that seemed no comfort. Mother dead!
Father so often angry, so lately cruel (for it was a hard blow, and
blistered and reddened Mary's soft white skin with pain): and then
her heart turned round, and she remembered with self-reproach how
provokingly she had looked and spoken, and how much her father had to
bear; and oh, what a kind and loving parent he had been, till these
days of trial. The remembrance of one little instance of his fatherly
love thronged after another into her mind, and she began to wonder
how she could have behaved to him as she had done.

Then he came home; and but for very shame she would have confessed
her penitence in words. But she looked sullen, from her effort to
keep down emotion; and for some time her father did not know how to
begin to speak. At length he gulped down pride, and said:

"Mary, I'm not above saying I'm very sorry I beat thee. Thou wert a
bit aggravating, and I'm not the man I was. But it were wrong, and
I'll try never to lay hands on thee again."

So he held out his arms, and in many tears she told him her
repentance for her fault. He never struck her again.

Still, he often was angry. But that was almost better than being
silent. Then he sat near the fire-place (from habit), smoking, or
chewing opium. Oh, how Mary loathed that smell! And in the dusk, just
before it merged into the short summer night, she had learned to look
with dread towards the window, which now her father would have kept
uncurtained; for there were not seldom seen sights which haunted her
in her dreams. Strange faces of pale men, with dark glaring eyes,
peered into the inner darkness, and seemed desirous to ascertain if
her father were at home. Or a hand and arm (the body hidden) was put
within the door, and beckoned him away. He always went. And once
or twice, when Mary was in bed, she heard men's voices below, in
earnest, whispered talk.

They were all desperate members of Trades' Unions, ready for any
thing; made ready by want.

While all this change for gloom yet struck fresh and heavy on Mary's
heart, her father startled her out of a reverie one evening, by
asking her when she had been to see Jane Wilson. From his manner of
speaking, she was made aware that he had been; but at the time of his
visit he had never mentioned any thing about it. Now, however, he
gruffly told her to go next day without fail, and added some abuse
of her for not having been before. The little outward impulse of
her father's speech gave Mary the push which she, in this instance,
required; and, accordingly, timing her visit so as to avoid Jem's
hours at home, she went the following afternoon to Ancoats.

The outside of the well-known house struck her as different; for
the door was closed, instead of open, as it once had always stood.
The window-plants, George Wilson's pride and especial care, looked
withering and drooping. They had been without water for a long time,
and now, when the widow had reproached herself severely for neglect,
in her ignorant anxiety, she gave them too much. On opening the door,
Alice was seen, not stirring about in her habitual way, but knitting
by the fire-side. The room felt hot, although the fire burnt gray
and dim, under the bright rays of the afternoon sun. Mrs. Wilson was
"siding" [39] the dinner things, and talking all the time, in a kind of
whining, shouting voice, which Mary did not at first understand.
She understood at once, however, that her absence had been noted,
and talked over; she saw a constrained look on Mrs. Wilson's
sorrow-stricken face, which told her a scolding was to come.


   [Footnote 39: To "side," to put aside, or in order.]


"Dear Mary, is that you?" she began. "Why, who would ha' dreamt of
seeing you! We thought you'd clean forgotten us; and Jem has often
wondered if he should know you, if he met you in the street."

Now, poor Jane Wilson had been sorely tried; and at present her
trials had had no outward effect, but that of increased acerbity of
temper. She wished to show Mary how much she was offended, and meant
to strengthen her cause, by putting some of her own sharp speeches
into Jem's mouth.

Mary felt guilty, and had no good reason to give as an apology; so
for a minute she stood silent, looking very much ashamed, and then
turned to speak to aunt Alice, who, in her surprised, hearty greeting
to Mary, had dropped her ball of worsted, and was busy trying to
set the thread to rights, before the kitten had entangled it past
redemption, once round every chair, and twice round the table.

"You mun speak louder than that, if you mean her to hear; she become
as deaf as a post this last few weeks. I'd ha' told you, if I'd
remembered how long it were sin' you'd seen her."

"Yes, my dear, I'm getting very hard o' hearing of late," said Alice,
catching the state of the case, with her quick-glancing eyes. "I
suppose it's the beginning of th' end."

"Don't talk o' that way," screamed her sister-in-law. "We've had enow
of ends and deaths without forecasting more." She covered her face
with her apron, and sat down to cry.

"He was such a good husband," said she, in a less excited tone, to
Mary, as she looked up with tear-streaming eyes from behind her
apron. "No one can tell what I've lost in him, for no one knew his
worth like me."

Mary's listening sympathy softened her, and she went on to unburden
her heavy laden heart.

"Eh, dear, dear! No one knows what I've lost. When my poor boys went,
I thought th' Almighty had crushed me to th' ground, but I never
thought o' losing George; I did na think I could ha' borne to ha'
lived without him. And yet I'm here, and he's--" A fresh burst of
crying interrupted her speech.

"Mary,"--beginning to speak again,--"did you ever hear what a poor
creature I were when he married me? And he such a handsome fellow!
Jem's nothing to what his father were at his age."

Yes! Mary had heard, and so she said. But the poor woman's thoughts
had gone back to those days, and her little recollections came out,
with many interruptions of sighs, and tears, and shakes of the head.

"There were nought about me for him to choose me. I were just well
enough afore that accident, but at after I were downright plain. And
there was Bessy Witter as would ha' given her eyes for him; she as is
Mrs. Carson now, for she were a handsome lass, although I never could
see her beauty then; and Carson warn't so much above her, as they're
both above us all now."

Mary went very red, and wished she could help doing so, and wished
also that Mrs. Wilson would tell her more about the father and mother
of her lover; but she durst not ask, and Mrs. Wilson's thoughts soon
returned to her husband, and their early married days.

"If you'll believe me, Mary, there never was such a born goose at
house-keeping as I were; and yet he married me! I had been in a
factory sin' five years old a'most, and I knew nought about cleaning,
or cooking, let alone washing and such-like work. The day after we
were married he goes to his work at after breakfast, and says he,
'Jenny, we'll ha' th' cold beef, and potatoes, and that's a dinner
fit for a prince.' I were anxious to make him comfortable, God knows
how anxious. And yet I'd no notion how to cook a potato. I know'd
they were boiled, and I know'd their skins were taken off, and that
were all. So I tidyed my house in a rough kind o' way, and then
I looked at that very clock up yonder," pointing at one that hung
against the wall, "and I seed it were nine o'clock, so, thinks I, th'
potatoes shall be well boiled at any rate, and I gets 'em on th' fire
in a jiffy (that's to say, as soon as I could peel 'em, which were a
tough job at first), and then I fell to unpacking my boxes! and at
twenty minutes past twelve he comes home, and I had th' beef ready on
th' table, and I went to take the potatoes out o' th' pot; but oh!
Mary, th' water had boiled away, and they were all a nasty brown
mass, as smelt through all the house. He said nought, and were very
gentle; but, oh, Mary, I cried so that afternoon. I shall ne'er
forget it; no, never. I made many a blunder at after, but none that
fretted me like that."

"Father does not like girls to work in factories," said Mary.

"No, I know he doesn't; and reason good. They oughtn't to go at
after they're married, that I'm very clear about. I could reckon up"
(counting with her fingers) "ay, nine men I know, as has been driven
to th' public-house by having wives as worked in factories; good
folk, too, as thought there was no harm in putting their little ones
out at nurse, and letting their house go all dirty, and their fires
all out; and that was a place as was tempting for a husband to stay
in, was it? He soon finds out gin-shops, where all is clean and
bright, and where th' fire blazes cheerily, and gives a man a welcome
as it were."

Alice, who was standing near for the convenience of hearing, had
caught much of this speech, and it was evident the subject had
previously been discussed by the women, for she chimed in.

"I wish our Jem could speak a word to th' Queen about factory work
for married women. Eh! but he comes it strong, when once yo get him
to speak about it. Wife o' his'n will never work away fra' home."

"I say it's Prince Albert as ought to be asked how he'd like his
missis to be from home when he comes in, tired and worn, and wanting
some one to cheer him; and may be, her to come in by-and-bye, just
as tired and down in th' mouth; and how he'd like for her never to
be at home to see to th' cleaning of his house, or to keep a bright
fire in his grate. Let alone his meals being all hugger-mugger and
comfortless. I'd be bound, prince as he is, if his missis served him
so, he'd be off to a gin-palace, or summut o' that kind. So why can't
he make a law again poor folks' wives working in factories?"

Mary ventured to say that she thought the Queen and Prince Albert
could not make laws, but the answer was,

"Pooh! don't tell me it's not the Queen as makes laws; and isn't she
bound to obey Prince Albert? And if he said they mustn't, why she'd
say they mustn't, and then all folk would say, oh no, we never shall
do any such thing no more."

"Jem's getten on rarely," said Alice, who had not heard her sister's
last burst of eloquence, and whose thoughts were still running on her
nephew, and his various talents. "He's found out summut about a crank
or a tank, I forget rightly which it is, but th' master's made him
foreman, and he all the while turning off hands; but he said he could
na part wi' Jem, nohow. He's good wage now: I tell him he'll be
thinking of marrying soon, and he deserves a right down good wife,
that he does."

Mary went very red, and looked annoyed, although there was a secret
spring of joy deep down in her heart, at hearing Jem so spoken of.
But his mother only saw the annoyed look, and was piqued accordingly.
She was not over and above desirous that her son should marry. His
presence in the house seemed a relic of happier times, and she had
some little jealousy of his future wife, whoever she might be. Still
she could not bear any one not to feel gratified and flattered by
Jem's preference, and full well she knew how above all others he
preferred Mary. Now she had never thought Mary good enough for Jem,
and her late neglect in coming to see her still rankled a little in
her breast. So she determined to invent a little, in order to do away
with any idea Mary might have that Jem would choose her for "his
right down good wife," as aunt Alice called it.

"Ay, he'll be for taking a wife soon," and then, in a lower voice,
as if confidentially, but really to prevent any contradiction or
explanation from her simple sister-in-law, she added,

"It'll not be long afore Molly Gibson (that's her at th'
provision-shop round the corner) will hear a secret as will not
displease her, I'm thinking. She's been casting sheep's eyes at our
Jem this many a day, but he thought her father would not give her
to a common working man; but now he's as good as her, every bit. I
thought once he'd a fancy for thee, Mary, but I donnot think yo'd
ever ha' suited, so it's best as it is."

By an effort Mary managed to keep down her vexation, and to say, "She
hoped he'd be happy with Molly Gibson. She was very handsome, for
certain."

"Ay, and a notable body, too. I'll just step up stairs and show you
the patchwork quilt she gave me but last Saturday."

Mary was glad she was going out of the room. Her words irritated her;
perhaps not the less because she did not fully believe them. Besides
she wanted to speak to Alice, and Mrs. Wilson seemed to think that
she, as the widow, ought to absorb all the attention.

"Dear Alice," began Mary, "I'm so grieved to find you so deaf; it
must have come on very rapid."

"Yes, dear, it's a trial; I'll not deny it. Pray God give me strength
to find out its teaching. I felt it sore one fine day when I thought
I'd go gather some meadow-sweet to make tea for Jane's cough; and
the fields seemed so dree and still, and at first I could na make
out what was wanting; and then it struck me it were th' song o' the
birds, and that I never should hear their sweet music no more, and I
could na help crying a bit. But I've much to be thankful for. I think
I'm a comfort to Jane, if I'm only some one to scold now and then;
poor body! It takes off her thoughts from her sore losses when she
can scold a bit. If my eyes are left I can do well enough; I can
guess at what folk are saying."

The splendid red and yellow patch quilt now made its appearance, and
Jane Wilson would not be satisfied unless Mary praised it all over,
border, centre, and ground-work, right side and wrong; and Mary did
her duty, saying all the more, because she could not work herself up
to any very hearty admiration of her rival's present. She made haste,
however, with her commendations, in order to avoid encountering
Jem. As soon as she was fairly away from the house and street, she
slackened her pace, and began to think. Did Jem really care for Molly
Gibson? Well, if he did, let him. People seemed all to think he was
much too good for her (Mary's own self). Perhaps some one else, far
more handsome, and far more grand, would show him one day that she
was good enough to be Mrs. Henry Carson. So temper, or what Mary
called "spirit," led her to encourage Mr. Carson more than ever she
had done before.

Some weeks after this, there was a meeting of the Trades' Union to
which John Barton belonged. The morning of the day on which it was to
take place he had lain late in bed, for what was the use of getting
up? He had hesitated between the purchase of meal or opium, and had
chosen the latter, for its use had become a necessity with him. He
wanted it to relieve him from the terrible depression its absence
occasioned. A large lump seemed only to bring him into a natural
state, or what had been his natural state formerly. Eight o'clock was
the hour fixed for the meeting; and at it were read letters, filled
with details of woe, from all parts of the country. Fierce, heavy
gloom brooded over the assembly; and fiercely and heavily did the men
separate, towards eleven o'clock, some irritated by the opposition of
others to their desperate plans.

It was not a night to cheer them, as they quitted the glare of the
gas-lighted room, and came out into the street. Unceasing, soaking
rain was falling; the very lamps seemed obscured by the damp upon
the glass, and their light reached but to a little distance from the
posts. The streets were cleared of passers-by; not a creature seemed
stirring, except here and there a drenched policeman in his oil-skin
cape. Barton wished the others good night, and set off home. He had
gone through a street or two, when he heard a step behind him; but he
did not care to look and see who it was. A little further, and the
person quickened step, and touched his arm very lightly. He turned,
and saw, even by the darkness visible of that badly-lighted street,
that the woman who stood by him was of no doubtful profession. It
was told by her faded finery, all unfit to meet the pelting of that
pitiless storm; the gauze bonnet, once pink, now dirty white; the
muslin gown, all draggled, and soaking wet up to the very knees; the
gay-coloured barège shawl, closely wrapped round the form, which yet
shivered and shook, as the woman whispered: "I want to speak to you."

He swore an oath, and bade her begone.

"I really do. Don't send me away. I'm so out of breath, I cannot say
what I would all at once." She put her hand to her side, and caught
her breath with evident pain.

"I tell thee I'm not the man for thee," adding an opprobrious name.
"Stay," said he, as a thought suggested by her voice flashed across
him. He gripped her arm--the arm he had just before shaken off, and
dragged her, faintly resisting, to the nearest lamp-post. He pushed
her bonnet back, and roughly held the face she would fain have
averted, to the light, and in her large, unnaturally bright gray
eyes, her lovely mouth, half open, as if imploring the forbearance
she could not ask for in words, he saw at once the long-lost Esther;
she who had caused his wife's death. Much was like the gay creature
of former years; but the glaring paint, the sharp features, the
changed expression of the whole! But most of all, he loathed the
dress; and yet the poor thing, out of her little choice of attire,
had put on the plainest she had, to come on that night's errand.

"So it's thee, is it! It's thee!" exclaimed John, as he ground his
teeth, and shook her with passion. "I've looked for thee long at
corners o' streets, and such like places. I knew I should find thee
at last. Thee'll may be bethink thee o' some words I spoke, which put
thee up at th' time; summut about street-walkers; but oh no! thou
art none o' them naughts; no one thinks thou art, who sees thy fine
draggle-tailed dress, and thy pretty pink cheeks!" stopping for very
want of breath.

"Oh, mercy! John, mercy! listen to me for Mary's sake!"

She meant his daughter, but the name only fell on his ear as
belonging to his wife; and it was adding fuel to the fire. In vain
did her face grow deadly pale round the vivid circle of paint, in
vain did she gasp for mercy,--he burst forth again.

"And thou names that name to me! and thou thinks the thought of her
will bring thee mercy! Dost thou know it was thee who killed her, as
sure as ever Cain killed Abel. She'd loved thee as her own, and she
trusted thee as her own, and when thou wert gone she never held up
head again, but died in less than a three week; and at the judgment
day she'll rise, and point to thee as her murderer; or if she don't,
I will."

He flung her, trembling, sickening, fainting, from him, and strode
away. She fell with a feeble scream against the lamp-post, and
lay there in her weakness, unable to rise. A policeman came up in
time to see the close of these occurrences, and concluding from
Esther's unsteady, reeling fall, that she was tipsy, he took her
in her half-unconscious state to the lock-ups for the night. The
superintendent of that abode of vice and misery was roused from his
dozing watch through the dark hours, by half-delirious wails and
moanings, which he reported as arising from intoxication. If he had
listened, he would have heard these words, repeated in various forms,
but always in the same anxious, muttering way.

"He would not listen to me; what can I do? He would not listen to me,
and I wanted to warn him! Oh, what shall I do to save Mary's child?
What shall I do? How can I keep her from being such a one as I am;
such a wretched, loathsome creature! She was listening just as I
listened, and loving just as I loved, and the end will be just like
my end. How shall I save her? She won't hearken to warning, or heed
it more than I did; and who loves her well enough to watch over her
as she should be watched? God keep her from harm! And yet I won't
pray for her; sinner that I am! Can my prayers be heard? No! they'll
only do harm. How shall I save her? He would not listen to me."

So the night wore away. The next morning she was taken up to the
New Bailey. It was a clear case of disorderly vagrancy, and she was
committed to prison for a month. How much might happen in that time!




CHAPTER XI.

MR. CARSON'S INTENTIONS REVEALED.


   "O Mary, canst thou wreck his peace,
     Wha for thy sake wad gladly die?
   Or canst thou break that heart of his,
     Whase only faut is loving thee?"

   BURNS.

   "I can like of the wealth, I must confess,
   Yet more I prize the man, though moneyless;
   I am not of their humour yet that can
   For title or estate affect a man;
   Or of myself one body deign to make
   With him I loathe, for his possessions' sake."

   WITHER'S "FIDELIA."


Barton returned home after his encounter with Esther, uneasy and
dissatisfied. He had said no more than he had been planning to say
for years, in case she was ever thrown in his way, in the character
in which he felt certain he should meet her. He believed she deserved
it all, and yet he now wished he had not said it. Her look, as she
asked for mercy, haunted him through his broken and disordered sleep;
her form, as he last saw her, lying prostrate in helplessness,
would not be banished from his dreams. He sat up in bed to try and
dispel the vision. Now, too late, his conscience smote him for his
harshness. It would have been all very well, he thought, to have said
what he did, if he had added some kind words, at last. He wondered
if his dead wife was conscious of that night's occurrence; and he
hoped not, for with her love for Esther he believed it would embitter
Heaven to have seen her so degraded and repulsed. For he now recalled
her humility, her tacit acknowledgment of her lost character; and he
began to marvel if there was power in the religion he had often heard
of, to turn her from her ways. He felt that no earthly power that he
knew of could do it, but there glimmered on his darkness the idea
that religion might save her. Still, where to find her again? In the
wilderness of a large town, where to meet with an individual of so
little value or note to any?

And evening after evening he paced those streets in which he had
heard her footsteps following him, peering under every fantastic,
discreditable bonnet, in the hopes of once more meeting Esther,
and addressing her in a far different manner from what he had done
before. But he returned, night after night, disappointed in his
search, and at last gave it up in despair, and tried to recall his
angry feelings towards her, in order to find relief from his present
self-reproach.

He often looked at Mary, and wished she were not so like her aunt,
for the very bodily likeness seemed to suggest the possibility of
a similar likeness in their fate; and then this idea enraged his
irritable mind, and he became suspicious and anxious about Mary's
conduct. Now hitherto she had been so remarkably free from all
control, and almost from all inquiry concerning her actions, that
she did not brook this change in her father's behaviour very well.
Just when she was yielding more than ever to Mr. Carson's desire of
frequent meetings, it was hard to be so questioned concerning her
hours of leaving off work, whether she had come straight home, &c.
She could not tell lies; though she could conceal much if she were
not questioned. So she took refuge in obstinate silence, alleging
as a reason for it her indignation at being so cross-examined. This
did not add to the good feeling between father and daughter, and yet
they dearly loved each other; and in the minds of each, one principal
reason for maintaining such behaviour as displeased the other, was
the believing that this conduct would insure that person's happiness.

Her father now began to wish Mary were married. Then this terrible
superstitious fear suggested by her likeness to Esther would be done
away with. He felt that he could not resume the reins he had once
slackened. But with a husband it would be different. If Jem Wilson
would but marry her! With his character for steadiness and talent!
But he was afraid Mary had slighted him, he came so seldom now to the
house. He would ask her.

"Mary, what's come o'er thee and Jem Wilson? Yo were great friends at
one time."

"Oh, folk say he's going to be married to Molly Gibson, and of course
courting takes up a deal o' time," answered Mary, as indifferently as
she could.

"Thou'st played thy cards badly, then," replied her father, in a
surly tone. "At one time he were desperate fond o' thee, or I'm much
mistaken. Much fonder of thee than thou deservedst."

"That's as people think," said Mary, pertly, for she remembered that
the very morning before she had met Mr. Carson, who had sighed, and
swore, and protested all manner of tender vows that she was the
loveliest, sweetest, best, &c. And when she had seen him afterwards
riding with one of his beautiful sisters, had he not evidently
pointed her out as in some way or other an object worthy of attention
and interest, and then lingered behind his sister's horse for a
moment to kiss his hand repeatedly. So, as for Jem Wilson, she could
whistle him down the wind.

But her father was not in the mood to put up with pertness, and he
upbraided her with the loss of Jem Wilson till she had to bite her
lips till the blood came, in order to keep down the angry words that
would rise in her heart. At last her father left the house, and then
she might give way to her passionate tears.

It so happened that Jem, after much anxious thought, had determined
that day to "put his fate to the touch, to win or lose it all." He
was in a condition to maintain a wife in comfort. It was true his
mother and aunt must form part of the household; but such is not an
uncommon case among the poor, and if there were the advantage of
previous friendship between the parties, it was not, he thought, an
obstacle to matrimony. Both mother and aunt he believed would welcome
Mary. And oh! what a certainty of happiness the idea of that welcome
implied.

He had been absent and abstracted all day long with the thought of
the coming event of the evening. He almost smiled at himself for his
care in washing and dressing in preparation for his visit to Mary. As
if one waistcoat or another could decide his fate in so passionately
momentous a thing. He believed he only delayed before his little
looking-glass for cowardice, for absolute fear of a girl. He would
try not to think so much about the affair, and he thought the more.

Poor Jem! it is not an auspicious moment for thee!

"Come in," said Mary, as some one knocked at the door, while she sat
sadly at her sewing, trying to earn a few pence by working over hours
at some mourning.

Jem entered, looking more awkward and abashed than he had ever done
before. Yet here was Mary all alone, just as he had hoped to find
her. She did not ask him to take a chair, but after standing a minute
or two he sat down near her.

"Is your father at home, Mary?" said he, by way of making an opening,
for she seemed determined to keep silence, and went on stitching
away.

"No, he's gone to his Union, I suppose." Another silence. It was no
use waiting, thought Jem. The subject would never be led to by any
talk he could think of in his anxious fluttered state. He had better
begin at once.

"Mary!" said he, and the unusual tone of his voice made her look up
for an instant, but in that time she understood from his countenance
what was coming, and her heart beat so suddenly and violently she
could hardly sit still. Yet one thing she was sure of; nothing he
could say should make her have him. She would show them all _who_
would be glad to have her. She was not yet calm after her father's
irritating speeches. Yet her eyes fell veiled before that passionate
look fixed upon her.

"Dear Mary! (for how dear you are, I cannot rightly tell you in
words). It's no new story I'm going to speak about. You must ha' seen
and known it long; for since we were boy and girl, I ha' loved you
above father and mother and all; and all I've thought on by day and
dreamt on by night, has been something in which you've had a share.
I'd no way of keeping you for long, and I scorned to try and tie you
down; and I lived in terror lest some one else should take you to
himself. But now, Mary, I'm foreman in th' works, and, dear Mary!
listen," as she, in her unbearable agitation, stood up and turned
away from him. He rose, too, and came nearer, trying to take hold of
her hand; but this she would not allow. She was bracing herself up to
refuse him, for once and for all.

"And now, Mary, I've a home to offer you, and a heart as true as ever
man had to love you and cherish you; we shall never be rich folk,
I dare say; but if a loving heart and a strong right arm can shield
you from sorrow, or from want, mine shall do it. I cannot speak
as I would like; my love won't let itself be put in words. But oh!
darling, say you believe me, and that you'll be mine."

She could not speak at once; her words would not come.

"Mary, they say silence gives consent; is it so?" he whispered.

Now or never the effort must be made.

"No! it does not with me." Her voice was calm, although she trembled
from head to foot. "I will always be your friend, Jem, but I can
never be your wife."

"Not my wife!" said he, mournfully. "Oh Mary, think awhile! you
cannot be my friend if you will not be my wife. At least I can never
be content to be only your friend. Do think awhile! If you say No you
will make me hopeless, desperate. It's no love of yesterday. It has
made the very groundwork of all that people call good in me. I don't
know what I shall be if you won't have me. And, Mary! think how glad
your father would be! it may sound vain, but he's told me more than
once how much he should like to see us two married!"

Jem intended this for a powerful argument, but in Mary's present mood
it told against him more than any thing; for it suggested the false
and foolish idea, that her father, in his evident anxiety to promote
her marriage with Jem, had been speaking to him on the subject with
some degree of solicitation.

"I tell you, Jem, it cannot be. Once for all, I will never marry
you."

"And is this the end of all my hopes and fears? the end of my life,
I may say, for it is the end of all worth living for!" His agitation
rose and carried him into passion. "Mary! you'll hear, may be, of
me as a drunkard, and may be as a thief, and may be as a murderer.
Remember! when all are speaking ill of me, you will have no right to
blame me, for it's your cruelty that will have made me what I feel
I shall become. You won't even say you'll try and like me; will you,
Mary?" said he, suddenly changing his tone from threatening despair
to fond passionate entreaty, as he took her hand and held it forcibly
between both of his, while he tried to catch a glimpse of her averted
face. She was silent, but it was from deep and violent emotion. He
could not bear to wait; he would not hope, to be dashed away again;
he rather in his bitterness of heart chose the certainty of despair,
and before she could resolve what to answer, he flung away her hand
and rushed out of the house.

"Jem! Jem!" cried she, with faint and choking voice. It was too late;
he left street after street behind him with his almost winged speed,
as he sought the fields, where he might give way unobserved to all
the deep despair he felt.

It was scarcely ten minutes since he had entered the house, and found
Mary at comparative peace, and now she lay half across the dresser,
her head hidden in her hands, and every part of her body shaking with
the violence of her sobs. She could not have told at first (if you
had asked her, and she could have commanded voice enough to answer)
why she was in such agonised grief. It was too sudden for her to
analyse, or think upon it. She only felt that by her own doing her
life would be hereafter dreary and blank. By-and-bye her sorrow
exhausted her body by its power, and she seemed to have no strength
left for crying. She sat down; and now thoughts crowded on her mind.
One little hour ago, and all was still unsaid, and she had her fate
in her own power. And yet, how long ago had she determined to say
pretty much what she did, if the occasion ever offered.

It was as if two people were arguing the matter; that mournful,
desponding communion between her former self and her present self.
Herself, a day, an hour ago; and herself now. For we have every one
of us felt how a very few minutes of the months and years called
life, will sometimes suffice to place all time past and future in an
entirely new light; will make us see the vanity or the criminality
of the bye-gone, and so change the aspect of the coming time, that
we look with loathing on the very thing we have most desired. A
few moments may change our character for life, by giving a totally
different direction to our aims and energies.

To return to Mary. Her plan had been, as we well know, to marry Mr.
Carson, and the occurrence an hour ago was only a preliminary step.
True; but it had unveiled her heart to her; it had convinced her she
loved Jem above all persons or things. But Jem was a poor mechanic,
with a mother and aunt to keep; a mother, too, who had shown her
pretty clearly she did not desire her for a daughter-in-law: while
Mr. Carson was rich, and prosperous, and gay, and (she believed)
would place her in all circumstances of ease and luxury, where want
could never come. What were these hollow vanities to her, now she
had discovered the passionate secret of her soul? She felt as if she
almost hated Mr. Carson, who had decoyed her with his baubles. She
now saw how vain, how nothing to her, would be all gaieties and
pomps, all joys and pleasures, unless she might share them with Jem;
yes, with him she harshly rejected so short a time ago. If he were
poor, she loved him all the better. If his mother did think her
unworthy of him, what was it but the truth, as she now owned with
bitter penitence. She had hitherto been walking in grope-light
towards a precipice; but in the clear revelation of that past hour,
she saw her danger, and turned away resolutely and for ever.

That was some comfort: I mean her clear perception of what she ought
not to do; of what no luring temptation should ever again induce her
to hearken to. How she could best undo the wrong she had done to Jem
and herself by refusing his love, was another anxious question. She
wearied herself with proposing plans, and rejecting them.

She was roused to a consciousness of time by hearing the neighbouring
church clock strike twelve. Her father she knew might be expected
home any minute, and she was in no mood for a meeting with him.
So she hastily gathered up her work, and went to her own little
bed-room, leaving him to let himself in.

She put out her candle, that her father might not see its light under
the door; and sat down on her bed to think. But after turning things
over in her mind again and again, she could only determine at once
to put an end to all further communication with Mr. Carson, in the
most decided way she could. Maidenly modesty (and true love is ever
modest) seemed to oppose every plan she could think of, for showing
Jem how much she repented her decision against him, and how dearly
she had now discovered that she loved him. She came to the unusual
wisdom of resolving to do nothing, but try and be patient, and
improve circumstances as they might turn up. Surely, if Jem knew of
her remaining unmarried, he would try his fortune again. He would
never be content with one rejection; she believed she could not
in his place. She had been very wrong, but now she would try and
do right, and have womanly patience, until he saw her changed and
repentant mind in her natural actions. Even if she had to wait for
years, it was no more than now it was easy to look forward to, as a
penance for her giddy flirting on the one hand, and her cruel mistake
concerning her feelings on the other. So anticipating a happy ending
to the course of her love, however distant it might be, she fell
asleep just as the earliest factory bells were ringing. She had sunk
down in her clothes, and her sleep was unrefreshing. She wakened up
shivery and chill in body, and sorrow-stricken in mind, though she
could not at first rightly tell the cause of her depression.

She recalled the events of the night before, and still resolved to
adhere to those determinations she had then formed. But patience
seemed a far more difficult virtue this morning.

She hastened down-stairs, and in her earnest sad desire to do right,
now took much pains to secure a comfortable though scanty breakfast
for her father; and when he dawdled into the room, in an evidently
irritable temper, she bore all with the gentleness of penitence, till
at last her mild answers turned away wrath.

She loathed the idea of meeting Sally Leadbitter at her daily
work; yet it must be done, and she tried to nerve herself for the
encounter, and to make it at once understood, that having determined
to give up having any thing further to do with Mr. Carson, she
considered the bond of intimacy broken between them.

But Sally was not the person to let these resolutions be carried
into effect too easily. She soon became aware of the present state
of Mary's feelings, but she thought they merely arose from the
changeableness of girlhood, and that the time would come when Mary
would thank her for almost forcing her to keep up her meetings and
communications with her rich lover.

So, when two days had passed over in rather too marked avoidance
of Sally on Mary's part, and when the former was made aware by Mr.
Carson's complaints that Mary was not keeping her appointments with
him, and that unless he detained her by force, he had no chance of
obtaining a word as she passed him in the street on her rapid walk
home, she resolved to compel Mary to what she called her own good.

She took no notice during the third day of Mary's avoidance as they
sat at work; she rather seemed to acquiesce in the coolness of their
intercourse. She put away her sewing early, and went home to her
mother, who, she said, was more ailing than usual. The other girls
soon followed her example, and Mary, casting a rapid glance up and
down the street, as she stood last on Miss Simmonds' door-step,
darted homewards, in hopes of avoiding the person whom she was fast
learning to dread. That night she was safe from any encounter on
her road, and she arrived at home, which she found as she expected,
empty; for she knew it was a club night, which her father would not
miss. She sat down to recover breath, and to still her heart, which
panted more from nervousness than from over-exertion, although she
had walked so quickly. Then she rose, and taking off her bonnet, her
eye caught the form of Sally Leadbitter passing the window with a
lingering step, and looking into the darkness with all her might, as
if to ascertain if Mary were returned. In an instant she re-passed
and knocked at the house-door, but without awaiting an answer, she
entered.

"Well, Mary, dear" (knowing well how little "dear" Mary considered
her just then); "i's so difficult to get any comfortable talk at Miss
Simmonds', I thought I'd just step up and see you at home."

"I understood from what you said your mother was ailing, and that you
wanted to be with her," replied Mary, in no welcoming tone.

"Ay, but mother's better now," said the unabashed Sally. "Your
father's out I suppose?" looking round as well as she could; for Mary
made no haste to perform the hospitable offices of striking a match,
and lighting a candle.

"Yes, he's out," said Mary, shortly, and busying herself at last
about the candle, without ever asking her visitor to sit down.

"So much the better," answered Sally, "for to tell you the truth,
Mary, I've a friend at th' end of the street, as is anxious to come
and see you at home, since you're grown so particular as not to like
to speak to him in the street. He'll be here directly."

"Oh, Sally, don't let him," said Mary, speaking at last heartily; and
running to the door she would have fastened it, but Sally held her
hands, laughing meanwhile at her distress.

"Oh, please, Sally," struggling, "dear Sally! don't let him come
here, the neighbours will so talk, and father'll go mad if he hears;
he'll kill me, Sally, he will. Besides, I don't love him--I never
did. Oh, let me go," as footsteps approached; and then, as they
passed the house, and seemed to give her a respite, she continued,
"Do, Sally, dear Sally, go and tell him I don't love him, and that I
don't want to have any thing more to do with him. It was very wrong,
I dare say, keeping company with him at all, but I'm very sorry, if
I've led him to think too much of me; and I don't want him to think
any more. Will you tell him this, Sally? and I'll do any thing for
you if you will."

"I'll tell you what I'll do," said Sally, in a more relenting mood,
"I'll go back with you to where he's waiting for us; or rather, I
should say, where I told him to wait for a quarter of an hour, till
I seed if your father was at home; and if I didn't come back in that
time, he said he'd come here, and break the door open but he'd see
you."

"Oh, let us go, let us go," said Mary, feeling that the interview
must be, and had better be anywhere than at home, where her father
might return at any minute. She snatched up her bonnet, and was at
the end of the court in an instant; but then, not knowing whether to
turn to the right or to the left, she was obliged to wait for Sally,
who came leisurely up, and put her arm through Mary's, with a kind of
decided hold, intended to prevent the possibility of her changing her
mind, and turning back. But this, under the circumstances, was quite
different to Mary's plan. She had wondered more than once if she must
not have another interview with Mr. Carson; and had then determined,
while she expressed her resolution that it should be the final one,
to tell him how sorry she was if she had thoughtlessly given him
false hopes. For be it remembered, she had the innocence, or the
ignorance, to believe his intentions honourable; and he, feeling
that at any price he must have her, only that he would obtain her as
cheaply as he could, had never undeceived her; while Sally Leadbitter
laughed in her sleeve at them both, and wondered how it would all
end,--whether Mary would gain her point of marriage, with her sly
affectation of believing such to be Mr. Carson's intention in
courting her.

Not very far from the end of the street, into which the court where
Mary lived opened, they met Mr. Carson, his hat a good deal slouched
over his face as if afraid of being recognised. He turned when he saw
them coming, and led the way without uttering a word (although they
were close behind) to a street of half-finished houses.

The length of the walk gave Mary time to recoil from the interview
which was to follow; but even if her own resolve to go through with
it had failed, there was the steady grasp of Sally Leadbitter, which
she could not evade without an absolute struggle.

At last he stopped in the shelter and concealment of a wooden
fence, put up to keep the building rubbish from intruding on the
foot-pavement. Inside this fence, a minute afterwards, the girls were
standing by him; Mary now returning Sally's detaining grasp with
interest, for she had determined on the way to make her a witness,
willing or unwilling, to the ensuing conversation. But Sally's
curiosity led her to be a very passive prisoner in Mary's hold.

With more freedom than he had ever used before, Mr. Carson put his
arm firmly round Mary's waist, in spite of her indignant resistance.

"Nay, nay! you little witch! Now I have caught you, I shall keep you
prisoner. Tell me now what has made you run away from me so fast
these few days--tell me, you sweet little coquette!"

Mary ceased struggling, but turned so as to be almost opposite to
him, while she spoke out calmly and boldly,

"Mr. Carson! I want to speak to you for once and for all. Since I met
you last Monday evening, I have made up my mind to have nothing more
to do with you. I know I've been wrong in leading you to think I
liked you; but I believe I didn't rightly know my own mind; and I
humbly beg your pardon, sir, if I've led you to think too much of
me."

For an instant he was surprised; the next, vanity came to his
aid, and convinced him that she could only be joking. He, young,
agreeable, rich, handsome! No! she was only showing a little womanly
fondness for coquetting.

"You're a darling little rascal to go on in this way! 'Humbly begging
my pardon if you've made me think too much of you.' As if you didn't
know I think of you from morning to night. But you want to be told it
again and again, do you?"

"No, indeed, sir, I don't. I would far liefer [40] that you should
say you will never think of me again, than that you should speak of
me in this way. For indeed, sir, I never was more in earnest than I
am, when I say to-night is the last night I will ever speak to you."


   [Footnote 40: "Liefer," rather.
                 "Yet had I _levre_ unwist for sorrow die."
                 _Chaucer; "Troilus and Creseide."_]


"Last night, you sweet little equivocator, but not last day. Ha,
Mary! I've caught you, have I?" as she, puzzled by his perseverance
in thinking her joking, hesitated in what form she could now put her
meaning.

"I mean, sir," she said, sharply, "that I will never speak to you
again at any time, after to-night."

"And what's made this change, Mary?" said he, seriously enough now.
"Have I done any thing to offend you?" added he, earnestly.

"No, sir," she answered gently, but yet firmly. "I cannot tell you
exactly why I've changed my mind; but I shall not alter it again; and
as I said before, I beg your pardon if I've done wrong by you. And
now, sir, if you please, good night."

"But I do not please. You shall not go. What have I done, Mary? Tell
me. You must not go without telling me how I have vexed you. What
would you have me do?"

"Nothing, sir! but (in an agitated tone) oh! let me go! You cannot
change my mind; it's quite made up. Oh, sir! why do you hold me so
tight? If you _will_ know why I won't have any thing more to do
with you, it is that I cannot love you. I have tried, and I really
cannot."

This naive and candid avowal served her but little. He could not
understand how it could be true. Some reason lurked behind. He was
passionately in love. What should he do to tempt her? A thought
struck him.

"Listen! Mary. Nay, I cannot let you go till you have heard me. I
do love you dearly; and I won't believe but what you love me a very
little, just a very little. Well, if you don't like to own it, never
mind! I only want now to tell you how much I love you, by what I am
ready to give up for you. You know (or perhaps you are not fully
aware) how little my father and mother would like me to marry you.
So angry would they be, and so much ridicule should I have to brave,
that of course I have never thought of it till now. I thought we
could be happy enough without marriage." (Deep sank those words into
Mary's heart.) "But now, if you like, I'll get a licence to-morrow
morning--nay, to-night, and I'll marry you in defiance of all the
world, rather than give you up. In a year or two my father will
forgive me, and meanwhile you shall have every luxury money can
purchase, and every charm that love can devise to make your life
happy. After all, my mother was but a factory girl." (This was said
half to himself, as if to reconcile himself to this bold step.) "Now,
Mary, you see how willing I am to--to sacrifice a good deal for you;
I even offer you marriage, to satisfy your little ambitious heart;
so, now, won't you say you can love me a little, little bit?"

He pulled her towards him. To his surprise, she still resisted. Yes!
though all she had pictured to herself for so many months in being
the wife of Mr. Carson was now within her grasp, she resisted. His
speech had given her but one feeling, that of exceeding great relief.
For she had dreaded, now she knew what true love was, to think of
the attachment she might have created; the deep feeling her flirting
conduct might have called out. She had loaded herself with reproaches
for the misery she might have caused. It was a relief to gather that
the attachment was of that low, despicable kind, which can plan to
seduce the object of its affection; that the feeling she had caused
was shallow enough, for it only pretended to embrace self, at the
expense of the misery, the ruin, of one falsely termed beloved. She
need not be penitent to such a plotter! That was the relief.

"I am obliged to you, sir, for telling me what you have. You may
think I am a fool; but I did think you meant to marry me all along;
and yet, thinking so, I felt I could not love you. Still I felt sorry
I had gone so far in keeping company with you. Now, sir, I tell you,
if I had loved you before, I don't think I should have loved you now
you have told me you meant to ruin me; for that's the plain English
of not meaning to marry me till just this minute. I said I was sorry,
and humbly begged your pardon; that was before I knew what you were.
Now I scorn you, sir, for plotting to ruin a poor girl. Good night."

And with a wrench, for which she had reserved all her strength, she
was off like a bolt. They heard her flying footsteps echo down the
quiet street. The next sound was Sally's laugh, which grated on Mr.
Carson's ears, and keenly irritated him.

"And what do you find so amusing, Sally?" asked he.

"Oh, sir, I beg your pardon. I humbly beg your pardon, as Mary says,
but I can't help laughing, to think how she's outwitted us." (She was
going to have said, "outwitted you," but changed the pronoun.)

"Why, Sally, had you any idea she was going to fly out in this
style?"

"No, I hadn't, to be sure. But if you did think of marrying her, why
(if I may be so bold as to ask) did you go and tell her you had no
thought of doing otherwise by her? That was what put her up at last!"

"Why I had repeatedly before led her to infer that marriage was not
my object. I never dreamed she could have been so foolish as to have
mistaken me, little provoking romancer though she be! So I naturally
wished her to know what a sacrifice of prejudice, of--of myself, in
short, I was willing to make for her sake; yet I don't think she was
aware of it after all. I believe I might have any lady in Manchester
if I liked, and yet I was willing and ready to marry a poor
dress-maker. Don't you understand me now? and don't you see what a
sacrifice I was making to humour her? and all to no avail."

Sally was silent, so he went on:

"My father would have forgiven any temporary connexion, far sooner
than my marrying one so far beneath me in rank."

"I thought you said, sir, your mother was a factory girl," reminded
Sally, rather maliciously.

"Yes, yes!--but then my father was in much such a station; at any
rate, there was not the disparity there is between Mary and me."

Another pause.

"Then you mean to give her up, sir? She made no bones of saying she
gave you up."

"No, I do not mean to give her up, whatever you and she may please to
think. I am more in love with her than ever; even for this charming
capricious ebullition of hers. She'll come round, you may depend upon
it. Women always do. They always have second thoughts, and find out
that they are best in casting off a lover. Mind! I don't say I shall
offer her the same terms again."

With a few more words of no importance, the allies parted.




CHAPTER XII.

OLD ALICE'S BAIRN.


   "I lov'd him not; and yet, now he is gone,
       I feel I am alone.
   I check'd him while he spoke; yet, could he speak,
       Alas! I would not check.
   For reasons not to love him once I sought,
       And wearied all my thought."

   W. S. LANDOR.


And now Mary had, as she thought, dismissed both her lovers. But they
looked on their dismissals with very different eyes. He who loved her
with all his heart and with all his soul, considered his rejection
final. He did not comfort himself with the idea, which would have
proved so well founded in his case, that women have second thoughts
about casting off their lovers. He had too much respect for his
own heartiness of love to believe himself unworthy of Mary; that
mock humble conceit did not enter his head. He thought he did not
"hit Mary's fancy;" and though that may sound a trivial every-day
expression, yet the reality of it cut him to the heart. Wild visions
of enlistment, of drinking himself into forgetfulness, of becoming
desperate in some way or another, entered his mind; but then the
thought of his mother stood like an angel with a drawn sword in the
way to sin. For, you know, "he was the only son of his mother, and
she was a widow;" dependent on him for daily bread. So he could not
squander away health and time, which were to him money wherewith to
support her failing years. He went to his work, accordingly, to all
outward semblance just as usual; but with a heavy, heavy heart
within.

Mr. Carson, as we have seen, persevered in considering Mary's
rejection of him as merely a "charming caprice." If she were at work,
Sally Leadbitter was sure to slip a passionately loving note into her
hand, and then so skilfully move away from her side, that Mary could
not all at once return it, without making some sensation among the
work-women. She was even forced to take several home with her. But
after reading one, she determined on her plan. She made no great
resistance to receiving them from Sally, but kept them unopened, and
occasionally returned them in a blank half-sheet of paper. But far
worse than this, was the being so constantly waylaid as she went home
by her persevering lover; who had been so long acquainted with all
her habits, that she found it difficult to evade him. Late or early,
she was never certain of being free from him. Go this way or that,
he might come up some cross street when she had just congratulated
herself on evading him for that day. He could not have taken a surer
mode of making himself odious to her.

And all this time Jem Wilson never came! Not to see her--that she did
not expect--but to see her father; to--she did not know what, but
she had hoped he would have come on some excuse, just to see if she
hadn't changed her mind. He never came. Then she grew weary and
impatient, and her spirits sank. The persecution of the one lover,
and the neglect of the other, oppressed her sorely. She could not now
sit quietly through the evening at her work; or, if she kept, by a
strong effort, from pacing up and down the room, she felt as if she
must sing to keep off thought while she sewed. And her songs were
the maddest, merriest, she could think of. "Barbara Allen," and such
sorrowful ditties, did well enough for happy times; but now she
required all the aid that could be derived from external excitement
to keep down the impulse of grief.

And her father, too--he was a great anxiety to her, he looked so
changed and so ill. Yet he would not acknowledge to any ailment. She
knew, that be it as late as it would, she never left off work until
(if the poor servants paid her pretty regularly for the odd jobs of
mending she did for them) she had earned a few pence, enough for one
good meal for her father on the next day. But very frequently all she
could do in the morning, after her late sitting up at night, was to
run with the work home, and receive the money from the person for
whom it was done. She could not stay often to make purchases of food,
but gave up the money at once to her father's eager clutch; sometimes
prompted by savage hunger it is true, but more frequently by a
craving for opium.

On the whole he was not so hungry as his daughter. For it was a long
fast from the one o'clock dinner-hour at Miss Simmonds' to the close
of Mary's vigil, which was often extended to midnight. She was young,
and had not yet learned to bear "clemming."

One evening, as she sang a merry song over her work, stopping
occasionally to sigh, the blind Margaret came groping in. It had been
one of Mary's additional sorrows that her friend had been absent
from home, accompanying the lecturer on music in his round among the
manufacturing towns of Yorkshire and Lancashire. Her grandfather,
too, had seen this a good time for going his expeditions in search of
specimens; so that the house had been shut up for several weeks.

"Oh! Margaret, Margaret! how glad I am to see you. Take care. There,
now, you're all right, that's father's chair. Sit down."--She kissed
her over and over again.

"It seems like the beginning o' brighter times, to see you again,
Margaret. Bless you! And how well you look!"

"Doctors always send ailing folk for change of air! and you know I've
had plenty o' that same lately."

"You've been quite a traveller for sure! Tell us all about it, do,
Margaret. Where have you been to, first place?"

"Eh, lass, that would take a long time to tell. Half o'er the world I
sometimes think. Bolton, and Bury, and Owdham, and Halifax, and--but
Mary, guess who I saw there! May be you know though, so it's not fair
guessing."

"No, I donnot. Tell me, Margaret, for I cannot abide waiting and
guessing."

"Well, one night as I were going fra' my lodgings wi' the help on a
lad as belonged to th' landlady, to find the room where I were to
sing, I heard a cough before me, walking along. Thinks I, that's Jem
Wilson's cough, or I'm much mistaken. Next time came a sneeze and a
cough, and then I were certain. First I hesitated whether I should
speak, thinking if it were a stranger he'd may be think me forrard.
[41] But I knew blind folks must not be nesh about using their
tongues, so says I, 'Jem Wilson, is that you?' And sure enough it
was, and nobody else. Did you know he were in Halifax, Mary?"


   [Footnote 41: "Forrard," forward.]


"No;" she answered, faintly and sadly; for Halifax was all the
same to her heart as the Antipodes; equally inaccessible by humble
penitent looks and maidenly tokens of love.

"Well, he's there, however; he's putting up an engine for some folks
there, for his master. He's doing well, for he's getten four or five
men under him; we'd two or three meetings, and he telled me all about
his invention for doing away wi' the crank, or somewhat. His master's
bought it from him, and ta'en out a patent, and Jem's a gentleman
for life wi' the money his master gied him. But you'll ha' heard all
this, Mary?"

No! she had not.

"Well, I thought it all happened afore he left Manchester, and then
in course you'd ha' known. But may be it were all settled after he
got to Halifax; however, he's gotten two or three hunder pounds for
his invention. But what's up with you, Mary? you're sadly out o'
sorts. You've never been quarrelling wi' Jem, surely?"

Now Mary cried outright; she was weak in body, and unhappy in mind,
and the time was come when she might have the relief of telling her
grief. She could not bring herself to confess how much of her sorrow
was caused by her having been vain and foolish; she hoped that need
never be known, and she could not bear to think of it.

"Oh, Margaret; do you know Jem came here one night when I were put
out, and cross. Oh, dear! dear! I could bite my tongue out when I
think on it. And he told me how he loved me, and I thought I did not
love him, and I told him I didn't; and, Margaret,--he believed me,
and went away so sad, and so angry; and now I'd do any thing,--I
would, indeed," her sobs choked the end of her sentence. Margaret
looked at her with sorrow, but with hope; for she had no doubt in her
own mind, that it was only a temporary estrangement.

"Tell me, Margaret," said Mary, taking her apron down from her eyes,
and looking at Margaret with eager anxiety, "what can I do to bring
him back to me? Should I write to him?"

"No," replied her friend, "that would not do. Men are so queer, they
like to have a' the courting to themselves."

"But I did not mean to write him a courting letter," said Mary,
somewhat indignantly.

"If you wrote at all, it would be to give him a hint you'd taken
the rue, and would be very glad to have him now. I believe now he'd
rather find that out himself."

"But he won't try," said Mary, sighing. "How can he find it out when
he's at Halifax?"

"If he's a will he's a way, depend upon it. And you would not have
him if he's not a will to you, Mary! No, dear!" changing her tone
from the somewhat hard way in which sensible people too often speak,
to the soft accents of tenderness which come with such peculiar grace
from them; "you must just wait and be patient. You may depend upon
it, all will end well, and better than if you meddled in it now."

"But it's so hard to be patient," pleaded Mary.

"Ay, dear; being patient is the hardest work we, any on us, have
to do through life, I take it. Waiting is far more difficult than
doing. I've known that about my sight, and many a one has known it in
watching the sick; but it's one of God's lessons we all must learn,
one way or another." After a pause. "Have ye been to see his mother
of late?"

"No; not for some weeks. When last I went she was so frabbit [42]
with me, that I really thought she wished I'd keep away."


   [Footnote 42: "Frabbit," ill-tempered.]


"Well! if I were you I'd go. Jem will hear on't, and it will do you
far more good in his mind than writing a letter, which, after all,
you would find a tough piece of work when you came to settle to it.
'Twould be hard to say neither too much nor too little. But I must be
going, grandfather is at home, and it's our first night together, and
he must not be sitting wanting me any longer."

She rose up from her seat, but still delayed going.

"Mary! I've somewhat else I want to say to you, and I don't rightly
know how to begin. You see, grandfather and I know what bad times is,
and we know your father is out o' work, and I'm getting more money
than I can well manage; and, dear, would you just take this bit o'
gold, and pay me back in good times?" The tears stood in Margaret's
eyes as she spoke.

"Dear Margaret, we're not so bad pressed as that." (The thought of
her father, and his ill looks, and his one meal a day, rushed upon
Mary.) "And yet, dear, if it would not put you out o' your way,--I
would work hard to make it up to you;--but would not your grandfather
be vexed?"

"Not he, wench! It were more his thought than mine, and we have
gotten ever so many more at home, so don't hurry yoursel about
paying. It's hard to be blind, to be sure, else money comes in so
easily now to what it used to do; and it's downright pleasure to earn
it, for I do so like singing."

"I wish I could sing," said Mary, looking at the sovereign.

"Some has one kind o' gifts, and some another. Many's the time when
I could see, that I longed for your beauty, Mary! We're like childer,
ever wanting what we han not got. But now I must say just one more
word. Remember, if you're sore pressed for money, we shall take it
very unkind if you donnot let us know. Good bye to ye."

In spite of her blindness she hurried away, anxious to rejoin her
grandfather, and desirous also to escape from Mary's expressions of
gratitude.

Her visit had done Mary good in many ways. It had strengthened her
patience and her hope. It had given her confidence in Margaret's
sympathy; and last, and really least in comforting power (of so
little value are silver and gold in comparison to love, that gift
in every one's power to bestow), came the consciousness of the
money-value of the sovereign she held in her hand. The many things it
might purchase! First of all came the thought of a comfortable supper
for her father that very night; and acting instantly upon the idea,
she set off in hopes that all the provision-shops might not yet be
closed, although it was so late.

That night the cottage shone with unusual light, and fire-gleam;
and the father and daughter sat down to a meal they thought almost
extravagant. It was so long since they had had enough to eat.

"Food gives heart," say the Lancashire people; and the next day Mary
made time to go and call on Mrs. Wilson, according to Margaret's
advice. She found her quite alone, and more gracious than she had
been the last time Mary had visited her. Alice was gone out, she
said.

"She would just step to the post-office, all for no earthly use. For
it were to ask if they hadn't a letter lying there for her from her
foster-son Will Wilson, the sailor-lad."

"What made her think there were a letter?" asked Mary.

"Why, yo see, a neighbour as has been in Liverpool, telled us Will's
ship were come in. Now he said last time he were in Liverpool he'd
ha' come to ha' seen Alice, but his ship had but a week holiday, and
hard work for the men in that time too. So Alice makes sure he'll
come this, and has had her hand behind her ear at every noise in th'
street, thinking it were him. And to-day she were neither to have nor
to hold, but off she would go to th' post, and see if he had na sent
her a line to th' old house near yo. I tried to get her to give up
going, for let alone her deafness she's getten so dark, she cannot
see five yards afore her; but no, she would go, poor old body."

"I did not know her sight had failed her; she used to have good eyes
enough when she lived near us."

"Ay, but it's gone lately a good deal. But you never ask after Jem--"
anxious to get in a word on the subject nearest her heart.

"No," replied Mary, blushing scarlet. "How is he?"

"I cannot justly say how he is, seeing he's at Halifax; but he were
very well when he wrote last Tuesday. Han ye heard o' his good luck?"

Rather to her disappointment, Mary owned she had heard of the sum his
master had paid him for his invention.

"Well! and did not Margaret tell yo what he'd done wi' it? It's just
like him though, ne'er to say a word about it. Why, when it were paid
what does he do, but get his master to help him to buy an income for
me and Alice. He had her name put down for her life; but, poor thing,
she'll not be long to the fore, I'm thinking. She's sadly failed of
late. And so, Mary, yo see, we're two ladies o' property. It's a
matter o' twenty pound a year they tell me. I wish the twins had
lived, bless 'em," said she, dropping a few tears. "They should ha'
had the best o' schooling, and their belly-fulls o' food. I suppose
they're better off in heaven, only I should so like to see 'em."

Mary's heart filled with love at this new proof of Jem's goodness;
but she could not talk about it. She took Jane Wilson's hand, and
pressed it with affection; and then turned the subject to Will, her
sailor nephew. Jane was a little bit sorry, but her prosperity had
made her gentler, and she did not resent what she felt as Mary's
indifference to Jem and his merits.

"He's been in Africa and that neighbourhood, I believe. He's a fine
chap, but he's not gotten Jem's hair. His has too much o' the red
in it. He sent Alice (but, maybe, she telled you) a matter o' five
pound when he were over before; but that were nought to an income, yo
know."

"It's not every one that can get a hundred or two at a time," said
Mary.

"No! no! that's true enough. There's not many a one like Jem.
That's Alice's step," said she, hastening to open the door to her
sister-in-law. Alice looked weary, and sad, and dusty. The weariness
and the dust would not have been noticed either by her, or the
others, if it had not been for the sadness.

"No letters!" said Mrs. Wilson.

"No, none! I must just wait another day to hear fra my lad. It's very
dree work, waiting!" said Alice.

Margaret's words came into Mary's mind. Every one has their time and
kind of waiting.

"If I but knew he were safe, and not drowned!" spoke Alice. "If I but
knew he _were_ drowned, I would ask grace to say, Thy will be done.
It's the waiting."

"It's hard work to be patient to all of us," said Mary; "I know I
find it so, but I did not know one so good as you did, Alice; I shall
not think so badly of myself for being a bit impatient, now I've
heard you say you find it difficult."

The idea of reproach to Alice was the last in Mary's mind; and Alice
knew it was. Nevertheless, she said,

"Then, my dear, I ask your pardon, and God's pardon, too, if I've
weakened your faith, by showing you how feeble mine was. Half our
life's spent in waiting, and it ill becomes one like me, wi' so many
mercies, to grumble. I'll try and put a bridle o'er my tongue, and
my thoughts too." She spoke in a humble and gentle voice, like one
asking forgiveness.

"Come, Alice," interposed Mrs. Wilson, "don't fret yoursel for e'er a
trifle wrong said here or there. See! I've put th' kettle on, and you
and Mary shall ha' a dish o' tea in no time."

So she bustled about, and brought out a comfortable-looking
substantial loaf, and set Mary to cut bread and butter, while she
rattled out the tea-cups--always a cheerful sound.

Just as they were sitting down, there was a knock heard at the door,
and without waiting for it to be opened from the inside, some one
lifted the latch, and in a man's voice asked, if one George Wilson
lived there?

Mrs. Wilson was entering on a long and sorrowful explanation of
his having once lived there, but of his having dropped down dead;
when Alice, with the instinct of love (for in all usual and common
instances, sight and hearing failed to convey impressions to her
until long after other people had received them), arose, and tottered
to the door.

"My bairn!--my own dear bairn!" she exclaimed, falling on Will
Wilson's neck.

You may fancy the hospitable and welcoming commotion that ensued; how
Mrs. Wilson laughed, and talked, and cried, altogether, if such a
thing can be done; and how Mary gazed with wondering pleasure at
her old playmate; now a dashing, bronzed-looking, ringletted sailor,
frank, and hearty, and affectionate.

But it was something different from common to see Alice's joy at once
more having her foster-child with her. She did not speak, for she
really could not; but the tears came coursing down her old withered
cheeks, and dimmed the horn spectacles she had put on, in order to
pry lovingly into his face. So what with her failing sight, and her
tear-blinded eyes, she gave up the attempt of learning his face by
heart through the medium of that sense, and tried another. She passed
her sodden, shrivelled hands, all trembling with eagerness, over his
manly face, bent meekly down in order that she might more easily make
her strange inspection. At last, her soul was satisfied.

After tea, Mary, feeling sure there was much to be said on both
sides, at which it would be better no one should be present, not even
an intimate friend like herself, got up to go away. This seemed to
arouse Alice from her dreamy consciousness of exceeding happiness,
and she hastily followed Mary to the door. There, standing outside,
with the latch in her hand, she took hold of Mary's arm, and spoke
nearly the first words she had uttered since her nephew's return.

"My dear! I shall never forgive mysel, if my wicked words to-night
are any stumbling-block in your path. See how the Lord has put coals
of fire on my head! Oh! Mary, don't let my being an unbelieving
Thomas weaken your faith. Wait patiently on the Lord, whatever your
trouble may be."




CHAPTER XIII.

A TRAVELLER'S TALES.


   "The mermaid sat upon the rocks
         All day long,
   Admiring her beauty and combing her locks,
         And singing a mermaid song.

   "And hear the mermaid's song you may,
         As sure as sure can be,
   If you will but follow the sun all day,
         And souse with him into the sea."

   W. S. LANDOR.


It was perhaps four or five days after the events mentioned in the
last chapter, that one evening, as Mary stood lost in reverie at the
window, she saw Will Wilson enter the court, and come quickly up to
her door. She was glad to see him, for he had always been a friend of
hers, perhaps too much like her in character ever to become any thing
nearer or dearer. She opened the door in readiness to receive his
frank greeting, which she as frankly returned.

"Come, Mary! on with bonnet and shawl, or whatever rigging you women
require before leaving the house. I'm sent to fetch you, and I can't
lose time when I'm under orders."

"Where am I to go to?" asked Mary, as her heart leaped up at the
thought of who might be waiting for her.

"Not very far," replied he. "Only to old Job Legh's round the corner
here. Aunt would have me come and see these new friends of hers, and
then we meant to ha' come on here to see you and your father, but the
old gentleman seems inclined to make a night of it, and have you all
there. Where's your father? I want to see him. He must come too."

"He's out, but I'll leave word next door for him to follow me; that's
to say, if he comes home afore long." She added, hesitatingly, "Is
any one else at Job's?"

"No! My aunt Jane would not come for some maggot or other; and as
for Jem! I don't know what you've all been doing to him, but he's as
down-hearted a chap as I'd wish to see. He's had his sorrows sure
enough, poor lad! But it's time for him to be shaking off his dull
looks, and not go moping like a girl."

"Then he's come fra Halifax, is he?" asked Mary.

"Yes! his body's come, but I think he's left his heart behind him.
His tongue I'm sure he has, as we used to say to childer, when they
would not speak. I try to rouse him up a bit, and I think he likes
having me with him, but still he's as gloomy and as dull as can be.
'Twas only yesterday he took me to the works, and you'd ha' thought
us two Quakers as the spirit hadn't moved, all the way down we were
so mum. It's a place to craze a man, certainly; such a noisy black
hole! There were one or two things worth looking at, the bellows for
instance, or the gale they called a bellows. I could ha' stood near
it a whole day; and if I'd a berth in that place, I should like to be
bellows-man, if there is such a one. But Jem weren't diverted even
with that; he stood as grave as a judge while it blew my hat out o'
my hand. He's lost all relish for his food, too, which frets my aunt
sadly. Come! Mary, ar'n't you ready?"

She had not been able to gather if she were to see Jem at Job Legh's;
but when the door was opened, she at once saw and felt he was not
there. The evening then would be a blank; at least so she thought for
the first five minutes; but she soon forgot her disappointment in the
cheerful meeting of old friends, all, except herself, with some cause
for rejoicing at that very time. Margaret, who could not be idle, was
knitting away, with her face looking full into the room, away from
her work. Alice sat meek and patient with her dimmed eyes and gentle
look, trying to see and to hear, but never complaining; indeed, in
her inner self she was blessing God for her happiness; for the joy of
having her nephew, her child, near her, was far more present to her
mind, than her deprivations of sight and hearing.

Job was in the full glory of host and hostess too, for by a tacit
agreement he had roused himself from his habitual abstraction, and
had assumed many of Margaret's little household duties. While he
moved about he was deep in conversation with the young sailor, trying
to extract from him any circumstances connected with the natural
history of the different countries he had visited.

"Oh! if you are fond of grubs, and flies, and beetles, there's no
place for 'em like Sierra Leone. I wish you'd had some of ours; we
had rather too much of a good thing; we drank them with our drink,
and could scarcely keep from eating them with our food. I never
thought any folk could care for such fat green beasts as those, or I
would ha' brought you them by the thousand. A plate full o' peas-soup
would ha' been full enough for you, I dare say; it were often too
full for us."

"I would ha' given a good deal for some on 'em," said Job.

"Well, I knew folk at home liked some o' the queer things one meets
with abroad; but I never thought they'd care for them nasty slimy
things. I were always on the look-out for a mermaid, for that I knew
were a curiosity."

"You might ha' looked long enough," said Job, in an under-tone of
contempt, which, however, the quick ears of the sailor caught.

"Not so long, master, in some latitudes, as you think. It stands to
reason th' sea hereabouts is too cold for mermaids; for women here
don't go half-naked on account o' climate. But I've been in lands
where muslin were too hot to wear on land, and where the sea were
more than milk-warm; and though I'd never the good luck to see a
mermaid in that latitude, I know them that has."

"Do tell us about it," cried Mary.

"Pooh, pooh!" said Job the naturalist.

Both speeches determined Will to go on with his story. What could a
fellow who had never been many miles from home know about the wonders
of the deep, that he should put him down in that way?

"Well, it were Jack Harris, our third mate last voyage, as many
and many a time telled us all about it. You see he were becalmed
off Chatham Island (that's in the Great Pacific, and a warm enough
latitude for mermaids, and sharks, and such like perils). So some of
the men took the long boat, and pulled for the island to see what
it were like; and when they got near, they heard a puffing, like a
creature come up to take breath; you've never heard a diver? No!
Well! you've heard folks in th' asthma, and it were for all the world
like that. So they looked around, and what should they see but a
mermaid, sitting on a rock, and sunning herself. The water is always
warmer when it's rough, you know, so I suppose in the calm she felt
it rather chilly, and had come up to warm herself."

"What was she like?" asked Mary, breathlessly.

Job took his pipe off the chimney-piece and began to smoke with very
audible puffs, as if the story were not worth listening to.

"Oh! Jack used to say she was for all the world as beautiful as any
of the wax ladies in the barbers' shops; only, Mary, there were one
little difference: her hair was bright grass green."

"I should not think that was pretty," said Mary, hesitatingly; as if
not liking to doubt the perfection of any thing belonging to such an
acknowledged beauty.

"Oh! but it is when you're used to it. I always think when first
we get sight of land, there's no colour so lovely as grass green.
However, she had green hair sure enough; and were proud enough of it,
too; for she were combing it out full-length when first they saw her.
They all thought she were a fair prize, and may be as good as a whale
in ready money (they were whale-fishers you know). For some folk
think a deal of mermaids, whatever other folk do." This was a hit at
Job, who retaliated in a series of sonorous spittings and puffs.

"So, as I were saying, they pulled towards her, thinking to catch
her. She were all the while combing her beautiful hair, and beckoning
to them, while with the other hand she held a looking-glass."

"How many hands had she?" asked Job.

"Two, to be sure, just like any other woman," answered Will,
indignantly.

"Oh! I thought you said she beckoned with one hand, and combed her
hair with another, and held a looking-glass with a third," said Job,
with provoking quietness.

"No! I didn't! at least if I did, I meant she did one thing after
another, as any one but" (here he mumbled a word or two) "could
understand. Well, Mary," turning very decidedly towards her, "when
she saw them coming near, whether it were she grew frightened at
their fowling-pieces, as they had on board, for a bit o' shooting on
the island, or whether it were she were just a fickle jade as did not
rightly know her own mind (which, seeing one half of her was woman,
I think myself was most probable), but when they were only about two
oars' length from the rock where she sat, down she plopped into the
water, leaving nothing but her hinder end of a fish tail sticking up
for a minute, and then that disappeared too."

"And did they never see her again?" asked Mary.

"Never so plain; the man who had the second watch one night declared
he saw her swimming round the ship, and holding up her glass for him
to look in; and then he saw the little cottage near Aber in Wales
(where his wife lived) as plain as ever he saw it in life, and his
wife standing outside, shading her eyes as if she were looking for
him. But Jack Harris gave him no credit, for he said he were always a
bit of a romancer, and beside that, were a home-sick, down-hearted
chap."

"I wish they had caught her," said Mary, musing.

"They got one thing as belonged to her," replied Will, "and that I've
often seen with my own eyes, and I reckon it's a sure proof of the
truth of their story; for them that wants proof."

"What was it?" asked Margaret, almost anxious her grandfather should
be convinced.

"Why, in her hurry she left her comb on the rock, and one o' the men
spied it; so they thought that were better than nothing, and they
rowed there and took it, and Jack Harris had it on board the _John
Cropper_, and I saw him comb his hair with it every Sunday morning."

"What was it like?" asked Mary, eagerly; her imagination running on
coral combs, studded with pearls.

"Why, if it had not had such a strange yarn belonging to it, you'd
never ha' noticed it from any other small-tooth comb."

"I should rather think not," sneered Job Legh.

The sailor bit his lips to keep down his anger against an old man.
Margaret felt very uneasy, knowing her grandfather so well, and not
daring to guess what caustic remark might come next to irritate the
young sailor guest.

Mary, however, was too much interested by the wonders of the deep
to perceive the incredulity with which Job Legh received Wilson's
account of the mermaid; and when he left off, half offended, and very
much inclined not to open his lips again through the evening, she
eagerly said,

"Oh do tell us something more of what you hear and see on board ship.
Do, Will!"

"What's the use, Mary, if folk won't believe one. There are things
I saw with my own eyes, that some people would pish and pshaw at, as
if I were a baby to be put down by cross noises. But I'll tell you,
Mary," with an emphasis on _you_, "some more of the wonders of the
sea, sin' you're not too wise to believe me. I have seen a fish fly."

This did stagger Mary. She had heard of mermaids as signs of inns,
and as sea-wonders, but never of flying fish. Not so Job. He put down
his pipe, and nodding his head as a token of approbation, he said

"Ay, ay! young man. Now you're speaking truth."

"Well now! you'll swallow that, old gentleman. You'll credit me when
I say I've seen a crittur half fish, half bird, and you won't credit
me when I say there be such beasts as mermaids, half fish, half
woman. To me, one's just as strange as t'other."

"You never saw the mermaid yoursel," interposed Margaret, gently. But
"love me, love my dog," was Will Wilson's motto, only his version was
"believe me, believe Jack Harris;" and the remark was not so soothing
to him as it was intended to have been.

"It's the Exocetus; one of the Malacopterygii Abdominales," said Job,
much interested.

"Ay, there you go! You're one o' them folks as never knows beasts
unless they're called out o' their names. Put 'em in Sunday clothes
and you know 'em, but in their work-a-day English you never know
nought about 'em. I've met wi' many o' your kidney; and if I'd ha'
known it, I'd ha' christened poor Jack's mermaid wi' some grand
gibberish of a name. Mermaidicus Jack Harrisensis; that's just like
their new-fangled words. D'ye believe there's such a thing as the
Mermaidicus, master?" asked Will, enjoying his own joke uncommonly,
as most people do.

"Not I! Tell me about the--"

"Well!" said Will, pleased at having excited the old gentleman's
faith and credit at last. "It were on this last voyage, about a day's
sail from Madeira, that one of our men--"

"Not Jack Harris, I hope," murmured Job.

"Called me," continued Will, not noticing the interruption, "to see
the what d'ye call it--flying fish I say it is. It were twenty feet
out o' water, and it flew near on to a hundred yards. But I say, old
gentleman, I ha' gotten one dried, and if you'll take it, why, I'll
give it you; only," he added, in a lower tone, "I wish you'd just gie
me credit for the Mermaidicus."

I really believe if the assuming faith in the story of the mermaid
had been made the condition of receiving the flying fish, Job Legh,
sincere man as he was, would have pretended belief; he was so much
delighted at the idea of possessing this specimen. He won the
sailor's heart by getting up to shake both his hands in his vehement
gratitude, puzzling poor old Alice, who yet smiled through her
wonder; for she understood the action to indicate some kindly feeling
towards her nephew.

Job wanted to prove his gratitude, and was puzzled how to do it.
He feared the young man would not appreciate any of his duplicate
Araneides; not even the great American Mygale, one of his most
precious treasures; or else he would gladly have bestowed any
duplicate on the donor of a real dried Exocetus. What could he do
for him? He could ask Margaret to sing. Other folks beside her old
doating grandfather thought a deal of her songs. So Margaret began
some of her noble old-fashioned songs. She knew no modern music (for
which her auditors might have been thankful), but she poured her rich
voice out in some of the old canzonets she had lately learnt while
accompanying the musical lecturer on his tour.

Mary was amused to see how the young sailor sat entranced; mouth,
eyes, all open, in order to catch every breath of sound. His very
lids refused to wink, as if afraid in that brief proverbial interval
to lose a particle of the rich music that floated through the room.
For the first time the idea crossed Mary's mind that it was possible
the plain little sensible Margaret, so prim and demure, might have
power over the heart of the handsome, dashing, spirited Will Wilson.

Job, too, was rapidly changing his opinion of his new guest. The
flying fish went a great way, and his undisguised admiration for
Margaret's singing carried him still further.

It was amusing enough to see these two, within the hour so barely
civil to each other, endeavouring now to be ultra-agreeable. Will,
as soon as he had taken breath (a long, deep gasp of admiration)
after Margaret's song, sidled up to Job, and asked him in a sort of
doubting tone,

"You wouldn't like a live Manx cat, would ye, master?"

"A what?" exclaimed Job.

"I don't know its best name," said Will, humbly. "But we call 'em
just Manx cats. They're cats without tails."

Now Job, in all his natural history, had never heard of such animals;
so Will continued,

"Because I'm going, afore joining my ship, to see mother's friends in
the island, and would gladly bring you one, if so be you'd like to
have it. They look as queer and out o' nature as flying fish, or"--he
gulped the words down that should have followed. "Especially when
you see 'em walking a roof-top, right again the sky, when a cat, as
is a proper cat, is sure to stick her tail stiff out behind, like a
slack-rope dancer a-balancing; but these cats having no tail, cannot
stick it out, which captivates some people uncommonly. If yo'll allow
me, I'll bring one for Miss there," jerking his head at Margaret. Job
assented with grateful curiosity, wishing much to see the tail-less
phenomenon.

"When are you going to sail?" asked Mary.

"I cannot justly say; our ship's bound for America next voyage, they
tell me. A mess-mate will let me know when her sailing-day is fixed;
but I've got to go to th' Isle o' Man first. I promised uncle last
time I were in England to go this next time. I may have to hoist the
blue Peter any day; so, make much of me while you have me, Mary."

Job asked him if he had ever been in America.

"Haven't I? North and South both! This time we're bound to North.
Yankee-Land, as we call it, where Uncle Sam lives."

"Uncle who?" said Mary.

"Oh, it's a way sailors have of speaking. I only mean I'm going to
Boston, U. S., that's Uncle Sam."

Mary did not understand, so she left him and went to sit by Alice,
who could not hear conversation unless expressly addressed to her.
She had sat patiently silent the greater part of the night, and now
greeted Mary with a quiet smile.

"Where's yo'r father?" asked she.

"I guess he's at his Union; he's there most evenings."

Alice shook her head; but whether it were that she did not hear, or
that she did not quite approve of what she heard, Mary could not
make out. She sat silently watching Alice, and regretting over her
dimmed and veiled eyes, formerly so bright and speaking; as if Alice
understood by some other sense what was passing in Mary's mind, she
turned suddenly round, and answered Mary's thought.

"Yo're mourning for me, my dear; and there's no need, Mary. I'm as
happy as a child. I sometimes think I am a child, whom the Lord is
hushabying to my long sleep. For when I were a nurse-girl, my missis
alway telled me to speak very soft and low, and to darken the room
that her little one might go to sleep; and now all noises are hushed
and still to me, and the bonny earth seems dim and dark, and I
know it's my Father lulling me away to my long sleep. I'm very
well content, and yo mustn't fret for me. I've had well nigh every
blessing in life I could desire."

Mary thought of Alice's long-cherished, fond wish to revisit the home
of her childhood, so often and often deferred, and now probably never
to take place. Or if it did, how changed from the fond anticipation
of what it was to have been! It would be a mockery to the blind and
deaf Alice.

The evening came quickly to an end. There was the humble cheerful
meal, and then the bustling merry farewell, and Mary was once more in
the quietness and solitude of her own dingy, dreary-looking home; her
father still out, the fire extinguished, and her evening's task of
work lying all undone upon the dresser. But it had been a pleasant
little interlude to think upon. It had distracted her attention for
a few hours from the pressure of many uneasy thoughts, of the dark,
heavy, oppressive times, when sorrow and want seemed to surround her
on every side; of her father, his changed and altered looks, telling
so plainly of broken health, and an embittered heart; of the morrow,
and the morrow beyond that, to be spent in that close monotonous
work-room, with Sally Leadbitter's odious whispers hissing in her
ear; and of the hunted look, so full of dread, from Miss Simmonds'
door-step up and down the street, lest her persecuting lover should
be near: for he lay in wait for her with wonderful perseverance, and
of late had made himself almost hateful, by the unmanly force which
he had used to detain her to listen to him, and the indifference with
which he exposed her to the remarks of the passers-by, any one of
whom might circulate reports which it would be terrible for her
father to hear--and worse than death should they reach Jem Wilson.
And all this she had drawn upon herself by her giddy flirting. Oh!
how she loathed the recollection of the hot summer evening, when,
worn out by stitching and sewing, she had loitered homewards with
weary languor, and first listened to the voice of the tempter.

And Jem Wilson! Oh, Jem, Jem, why did you not come to receive some of
the modest looks and words of love which Mary longed to give you, to
try and make up for the hasty rejection which you as hastily took to
be final, though both mourned over it with many tears. But day after
day passed away, and patience seemed of no avail; and Mary's cry was
ever the old moan of the Moated Grange,

   "Why comes he not," she said,
   "I am aweary, aweary,
   I would that I were dead."




CHAPTER XIV.

JEM'S INTERVIEW WITH POOR ESTHER.


   "Know the temptation ere you judge the crime!
   Look on this tree--'twas green, and fair, and graceful;
   Yet now, save these few shoots, how dry and rotten!
   Thou canst not tell the cause. Not long ago,
   A neighbour oak, with which its roots were twined,
   In falling wrenched them with such cruel force,
   That though we covered them again with care,
   Its beauty withered, and it pined away.
   So, could we look into the human breast,
   How oft the fatal blight that meets our view,
   Should we trace down to the torn, bleeding fibres
   Of a too trusting heart--where it were shame,
   For pitying tears, to give contempt or blame."

   "STREET WALKS."


The month was over;--the honeymoon to the newly-married; the
exquisite convalescence to the "living mother of a living child;" the
"first dark days of nothingness" to the widow and the child bereaved;
the term of penance, of hard labour, and solitary confinement, to the
shrinking, shivering, hopeless prisoner.

"Sick, and in prison, and ye visited me." Shall you, or I, receive
such blessing? I know one who will. An overseer of a foundry, an aged
man, with hoary hair, has spent his Sabbaths, for many years, in
visiting the prisoners and the afflicted in Manchester New Bailey;
not merely advising and comforting, but putting means into their
power of regaining the virtue and the peace they had lost; becoming
himself their guarantee in obtaining employment, and never deserting
those who have once asked help from him. [43]


   [Footnote 43: Vide _Manchester Guardian_, of Wednesday, March 18,
                 1846; and also the Reports of Captain Williams,
                 prison inspector.]


Esther's term of imprisonment was ended. She received a good
character in the governor's books; she had picked her daily quantity
of oakum, had never deserved the extra punishment of the tread-mill,
and had been civil and decorous in her language. And once more she
was out of prison. The door closed behind her with a ponderous clang,
and in her desolation she felt as if shut out of home--from the only
shelter she could meet with, houseless and pennyless as she was, on
that dreary day.

But it was but for an instant that she stood there doubting. One
thought had haunted her both by night and by day, with monomaniacal
incessancy; and that thought was how to save Mary (her dead sister's
only child, her own little pet in the days of her innocence) from
following in the same downward path to vice. To whom could she speak
and ask for aid? She shrank from the idea of addressing John Barton
again; her heart sank within her, at the remembrance of his fierce
repulsing action, and far fiercer words. It seemed worse than death
to reveal her condition to Mary, else she sometimes thought that this
course would be the most terrible, the most efficient warning. She
must speak; to that she was soul-compelled; but to whom? She dreaded
addressing any of her former female acquaintance, even supposing they
had sense, or spirit, or interest enough to undertake her mission.

To whom shall the outcast prostitute tell her tale? Who will give her
help in her day of need? Hers is the leper-sin, and all stand aloof
dreading to be counted unclean.

In her wild night wanderings, she had noted the haunts and habits
of many a one who little thought of a watcher in the poor forsaken
woman. You may easily imagine that a double interest was attached
by her to the ways and companionships of those with whom she had
been acquainted in the days which, when present, she had considered
hardly-worked and monotonous, but which now in retrospection seemed
so happy and unclouded. Accordingly, she had, as we have seen, known
where to meet with John Barton on that unfortunate night, which had
only produced irritation in him, and a month's imprisonment to her.
She had also observed that he was still intimate with the Wilsons.
She had seen him walking and talking with both father and son; her
old friends too; and she had shed unregarded, unvalued tears, when
some one had casually told her of George Wilson's sudden death. It
now flashed across her mind, that to the son, to Mary's play-fellow,
her elder brother in the days of childhood, her tale might be told,
and listened to with interest, and some mode of action suggested by
him by which Mary might be guarded and saved.

All these thoughts had passed through her mind while yet she was in
prison; so when she was turned out, her purpose was clear, and she
did not feel her desolation of freedom as she would otherwise have
done.

That night she stationed herself early near the foundry where she
knew Jem worked; he stayed later than usual, being detained by some
arrangements for the morrow. She grew tired and impatient; many
workmen had come out of the door in the long, dead, brick wall, and
eagerly had she peered into their faces, deaf to all insult or curse.
He must have gone home early; one more turn in the street, and she
would go.

During that turn he came out, and in the quiet of that street of
workshops and warehouses, she directly heard his steps. Now her heart
failed her for an instant; but still she was not daunted from her
purpose, painful as its fulfilment was sure to be. She laid her hand
on his arm. As she expected, after a momentary glance at the person
who thus endeavoured to detain him, he made an effort to shake it
off, and pass on. But trembling as she was, she had provided against
this by a firm and unusual grasp.

"You must listen to me, Jem Wilson," she said, with almost an accent
of command.

"Go away, missis; I've nought to do with you, either in hearkening,
or talking."

He made another struggle.

"You must listen," she said again, authoritatively, "for Mary
Barton's sake."

The spell of her name was as potent as that of the mariner's
glittering eye. "He listened like a three-year child."

"I know you care enough for her to wish to save her from harm."

He interrupted his earnest gaze into her face, with the exclamation--

"And who can yo be to know Mary Barton, or to know that she's ought
to me?"

There was a little strife in Esther's mind for an instant, between
the shame of acknowledging herself, and the additional weight to her
revelation which such acknowledgment would give. Then she spoke.

"Do you remember Esther, the sister of John Barton's wife? the aunt
to Mary? And the Valentine I sent you last February ten years?"

"Yes, I mind her well! But yo are not Esther, are you?" He looked
again into her face, and seeing that indeed it was his boyhood's
friend, he took her hand, and shook it with a cordiality that forgot
the present in the past.

"Why, Esther! Where han ye been this many a year? Where han ye been
wandering that we none of us could find you out?"

The question was asked thoughtlessly, but answered with fierce
earnestness.

"Where have I been? What have I been doing? Why do you torment me
with questions like these? Can you not guess? But the story of my
life is wanted to give force to my speech, afterwards I will tell it
you. Nay! don't change your fickle mind now, and say you don't want
to hear it. You must hear it, and I must tell it; and then see after
Mary, and take care she does not become like me. As she is loving
now, so did I love once; one above me far." She remarked not, in her
own absorption, the change in Jem's breathing, the sudden clutch at
the wall which told the fearfully vivid interest he took in what she
said. "He was so handsome, so kind! Well, the regiment was ordered to
Chester (did I tell you he was an officer?), and he could not bear to
part from me, nor I from him, so he took me with him. I never thought
poor Mary would have taken it so to heart! I always meant to send for
her to pay me a visit when I was married; for, mark you! he promised
me marriage. They all do. Then came three years of happiness. I
suppose I ought not to have been happy, but I was. I had a little
girl, too. Oh! the sweetest darling that ever was seen! But I must
not think of her," putting her hand wildly up to her forehead, "or I
shall go mad; I shall."

"Don't tell me any more about yoursel," said Jem, soothingly.

"What! you're tired already, are you? but I'll tell you; as you've
asked for it, you shall hear it. I won't recall the agony of the past
for nothing. I will have the relief of telling it. Oh, how happy I
was!"--sinking her voice into a plaintive child-like manner. "It
came like a shot on me when one day he came to me and told me he was
ordered to Ireland, and must leave me behind; at Bristol we then
were."

Jem muttered some words; she caught their meaning, and in a pleading
voice continued,

"Oh, don't abuse him; don't speak a word against him! You don't know
how I love him yet; yet, when I am sunk so low. You don't guess how
kind he was. He gave me fifty pound before we parted, and I knew he
could ill spare it. Don't, Jem, please," as his muttered indignation
rose again. For her sake he ceased. "I might have done better with
the money; I see now. But I did not know the value of money. Formerly
I had earned it easily enough at the factory, and as I had no more
sensible wants, I spent it on dress and on eating. While I lived with
him, I had it for asking; and fifty pounds would, I thought, go a
long way. So I went back to Chester, where I'd been so happy, and
set up a small-ware shop, and hired a room near. We should have done
well, but alas! alas! my little girl fell ill, and I could not mind
my shop and her too; and things grew worse and worse. I sold my
goods any how to get money to buy her food and medicine; I wrote
over and over again to her father for help, but he must have changed
his quarters, for I never got an answer. The landlord seized the
few bobbins and tapes I had left, for shop-rent; and the person to
whom the mean little room, to which we had been forced to remove,
belonged, threatened to turn us out unless his rent was paid; it had
run on many weeks, and it was winter, cold bleak winter; and my child
was so ill, so ill, and I was starving. And I could not bear to see
her suffer, and forgot how much better it would be for us to die
together;--oh her moans, her moans, which money would give me the
means of relieving! So I went out into the street, one January
night--Do you think God will punish me for that?" she asked with wild
vehemence, almost amounting to insanity, and shaking Jem's arm in
order to force an answer from him.

But before he could shape his heart's sympathy into words, her voice
had lost its wildness, and she spoke with the quiet of despair.

"But it's no matter! I've done that since, which separates us as far
asunder as heaven and hell can be." Her voice rose again to the sharp
pitch of agony. "My darling! my darling! even after death I may not
see thee, my own sweet one! She was so good--like a little angel.
What is that text, I don't remember,--that text mother used to teach
me when I sat on her knee long ago; it begins, 'Blessed are the
pure'"--

"Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God."

"Ay, that's it! It would break mother's heart if she knew what I am
now--it did break Mary's heart, you see. And now I recollect it was
about her child I wanted so to see you, Jem. You know Mary Barton,
don't you?" said she, trying to collect her thoughts.

Yes, Jem knew her. How well, his beating heart could testify!

"Well, there's something to do for her; I forget what; wait a
minute! She is so like my little girl;" said she, raising her eyes,
glistening with unshed tears, in search of the sympathy of Jem's
countenance.

He deeply pitied her; but oh! how he longed to recall her mind to the
subject of Mary, and the lover above her in rank, and the service to
be done for her sake. But he controlled himself to silence. After
awhile, she spoke again, and in a calmer voice.

"When I came to Manchester (for I could not stay in Chester after her
death), I found you all out very soon. And yet I never thought my
poor sister was dead. I suppose I would not think so. I used to watch
about the court where John lived, for many and many a night, and
gather all I could about them from the neighbours' talk; for I never
asked a question. I put this and that together, and followed one, and
listened to the other; many's the time I've watched the policeman off
his beat, and peeped through the chink of the window-shutter to see
the old room, and sometimes Mary or her father sitting up late for
some reason or another. I found out Mary went to learn dress-making,
and I began to be frightened for her; for it's a bad life for a girl
to be out late at night in the streets, and after many an hour of
weary work, they're ready to follow after any novelty that makes a
little change. But I made up my mind, that bad as I was, I could
watch over Mary and perhaps keep her from harm. So I used to wait
for her at nights, and follow her home, often when she little knew
any one was near her. There was one of her companions I never could
abide, and I'm sure that girl is at the bottom of some mischief.
By-and-bye, Mary's walks homewards were not alone. She was joined
soon after she came out, by a man; a gentleman. I began to fear
for her, for I saw she was light-hearted, and pleased with his
attentions; and I thought worse of him for having such long talks
with that bold girl I told you of. But I was laid up for a long time
with spitting of blood; and could do nothing. I'm sure it made me
worse, thinking about what might be happening to Mary. And when I
came out, all was going on as before, only she seemed fonder of him
than ever; and oh Jem! her father won't listen to me, and it's you
must save Mary! You're like a brother to her, and maybe could give
her advice and watch over her, and at any rate John will hearken to
you; only he's so stern and so cruel." She began to cry a little at
the remembrance of his harsh words; but Jem cut her short by his
hoarse, stern inquiry,

"Who is this spark that Mary loves? Tell me his name!"

"It's young Carson, old Carson's son, that your father worked for."

There was a pause. She broke the silence.

"Oh! Jem, I charge you with the care of her! I suppose it would be
murder to kill her, but it would be better for her to die than to
live to lead such a life as I do. Do you hear me, Jem?"

"Yes! I hear you. It would be better. Better we were all dead." This
was said as if thinking aloud; but he immediately changed his tone,
and continued,

"Esther, you may trust to my doing all I can for Mary. That I have
determined on. And now listen to me! you loathe the life you lead,
else you would not speak of it as you do. Come home with me. Come to
my mother. She and my aunt Alice live together. I will see that they
give you a welcome. And to-morrow I will see if some honest way of
living cannot be found for you. Come home with me."

She was silent for a minute, and he hoped he had gained his point.
Then she said,

"God bless you, Jem, for the words you have just spoken. Some years
ago you might have saved me, as I hope and trust you will yet save
Mary. But it is too late now;--too late," she added, with accents of
deep despair.

Still he did not relax his hold. "Come home," he said.

"I tell you, I cannot. I could not lead a virtuous life if I would.
I should only disgrace you. If you will know all," said she, as he
still seemed inclined to urge her, "I must have drink. Such as live
like me could not bear life if they did not drink. It's the only
thing to keep us from suicide. If we did not drink, we could not
stand the memory of what we have been, and the thought of what we
are, for a day. If I go without food, and without shelter, I must
have my dram. Oh! you don't know the awful nights I have had in
prison for want of it!" said she, shuddering, and glaring round with
terrified eyes, as if dreading to see some spiritual creature, with
dim form, near her.

"It is so frightful to see them," whispering in tones of wildness,
although so low spoken. "There they go round and round my bed the
whole night through. My mother, carrying little Annie (I wonder how
they got together) and Mary--and all looking at me with their sad,
stony eyes; oh Jem! it is so terrible! They don't turn back either,
but pass behind the head of the bed, and I feel their eyes on me
everywhere. If I creep under the clothes I still see them; and what
is worse," hissing out her words with fright, "they see me. Don't
speak to me of leading a better life--I must have drink. I cannot
pass to-night without a dram; I dare not."

Jem was silent from deep sympathy. Oh! could he, then, do nothing for
her! She spoke again, but in a less excited tone, although it was
thrillingly earnest.

"You are grieved for me! I know it better than if you told me in
words. But you can do nothing for me. I am past hope. You can yet
save Mary. You must. She is innocent, except for the great error of
loving one above her in station. Jem! you _will_ save her?"

With heart and soul, though in few words, Jem promised that if aught
earthly could keep her from falling, he would do it. Then she blessed
him, and bade him good-night.

"Stay a minute," said he, as she was on the point of departure. "I
may want to speak to you again. I mun know where to find you--where
do you live?"

She laughed strangely. "And do you think one sunk so low as I am has
a home? Decent, good people have homes. We have none. No, if you want
me, come at night, and look at the corners of the streets about here.
The colder, the bleaker, the more stormy the night, the more certain
you will be to find me. For then," she added, with a plaintive fall
in her voice, "it is so cold sleeping in entries, and on door-steps,
and I want a dram more than ever."

Again she rapidly turned off, and Jem also went on his way. But
before he reached the end of the street, even in the midst of the
jealous anguish that filled his heart, his conscience smote him.
He had not done enough to save her. One more effort, and she might
have come. Nay, twenty efforts would have been well rewarded by her
yielding. He turned back, but she was gone. In the tumult of his
other feelings, his self-reproach was deadened for the time. But many
and many a day afterwards he bitterly regretted his omission of duty;
his weariness of well-doing.

Now, the great thing was to reach home, and solitude. Mary loved
another! Oh! how should he bear it? He had thought her rejection of
him a hard trial, but that was nothing now. He only remembered it,
to be thankful he had not yielded to the temptation of trying his
fate again, not in actual words, but in a meeting, where her manner
should tell far more than words, that her sweeter smiles, her dainty
movements, her pretty household ways, were all to be reserved to
gladden another's eyes and heart. And he must live on; that seemed
the strangest. That a long life (and he knew men did live long, even
with deep, biting sorrow corroding at their hearts) must be spent
without Mary; nay, with the consciousness she was another's! That
hell of thought he would reserve for the quiet of his own room, the
dead stillness of night. He was on the threshold of home now.

He entered. There were the usual faces, the usual sights. He loathed
them, and then he cursed himself because he loathed them. His
mother's love had taken a cross turn, because he had kept the
tempting supper she had prepared for him waiting until it was
nearly spoilt. Alice, her dulled senses deadening day by day, sat
mutely near the fire; her happiness, bounded by the circle of the
consciousness of the presence of her foster child, knowing that his
voice repeated what was passing to her deafened ear, that his arm
removed each little obstacle to her tottering steps. And Will, out
of the very kindness of his heart, talked more and more merrily than
ever. He saw Jem was downcast, and fancied his rattling might cheer
him; at any rate, it drowned his aunt's muttered grumblings, and in
some measure concealed the blank of the evening. At last, bed-time
came; and Will withdrew to his neighbouring lodging; and Jane and
Alice Wilson had raked the fire, and fastened doors and shutters,
and pattered up stairs, with their tottering foot-steps, and shrill
voices. Jem, too, went to the closet termed his bed-room. There was
no bolt to the door; but by one strong effort of his right arm, a
heavy chest was moved against it, and he could sit down on the side
of his bed, and think.

Mary loved another! That idea would rise uppermost in his mind, and
had to be combated in all its forms of pain. It was, perhaps, no
great wonder that she should prefer one so much above Jem in the
external things of life. But the gentleman; why did he, with his
range of choice among the ladies of the land, why did he stoop down
to carry off the poor man's darling? With all the glories of the
garden at his hand, why did he prefer to cull the wild-rose,--Jem's
own fragrant wild-rose?

His _own!_ Oh! never now his own!--Gone for evermore!

Then uprose the guilty longing for blood!--The frenzy of
jealousy!--Some one should die. He would rather Mary were dead, cold
in her grave, than that she were another's. A vision of her pale,
sweet face, with her bright hair all bedabbled with gore, seemed to
float constantly before his aching eyes. But hers were ever open,
and contained, in their soft, deathly look, such mute reproach! What
had she done to deserve such cruel treatment from him? She had been
wooed by one whom Jem knew to be handsome, gay, and bright, and she
had given him her love. That was all! It was the wooer who should
die. Yes, die, knowing the cause of his death. Jem pictured him (and
gloated on the picture), lying smitten, yet conscious; and listening
to the upbraiding accusation of his murderer. How he had left his own
rank, and dared to love a maiden of low degree; and--oh! stinging
agony of all--how she, in return, had loved him! Then the other
nature spoke up, and bade him remember the anguish he should so
prepare for Mary! At first he refused to listen to that better voice;
or listened only to pervert. He would glory in her wailing grief! he
would take pleasure in her desolation of heart!

No! he could not, said the still small voice. It would be worse, far
worse, to have caused such woe, than it was now to bear his present
heavy burden.

But it was too heavy, too grievous to be borne, and live. He would
slay himself, and the lovers should love on, and the sun shine
bright, and he with his burning, woeful heart would be at rest. "Rest
that is reserved for the people of God."

Had he not promised with such earnest purpose of soul, as makes words
more solemn than oaths, to save Mary from becoming such as Esther?
Should he shrink from the duties of life, into the cowardliness of
death? Who would then guard Mary, with her love and her innocence?
Would it not be a goodly thing to serve her, although she loved him
not; to be her preserving angel, through the perils of life; and she,
unconscious all the while?

He braced up his soul, and said to himself, that with God's help he
would be that earthly keeper.

And now the mists and the storms seemed clearing away from his path,
though it still was full of stinging thorns. Having done the duty
nearest to him (of reducing the tumult of his own heart to something
like order), the second became more plain before him.

Poor Esther's experience had led her, perhaps, too hastily to the
conclusion, that Mr. Carson's intentions were evil towards Mary; at
least she had given no just ground for the fears she entertained
that such was the case. It was possible, nay, to Jem's heart, very
probable, that he might only be too happy to marry her. She was a
lady by right of nature, Jem thought; in movement, grace, and spirit.
what was birth to a Manchester manufacturer, many of whom glory, and
justly too, in being the architects of their own fortunes? And, as
far as wealth was concerned, judging another by himself, Jem could
only imagine it a great privilege to lay it at the feet of the loved
one. Harry Carson's mother had been a factory girl; so, after all,
what was the great reason for doubting his intentions towards Mary?

There might probably be some little awkwardness about the affair at
first: Mary's father having such strong prejudices on the one hand;
and something of the same kind being likely to exist on the part of
Mr. Carson's family. But Jem knew he had power over John Barton's
mind; and it would be something to exert that power in promoting
Mary's happiness, and to relinquish all thought of self in so doing.

Oh! why had Esther chosen him for this office? It was beyond his
strength to act rightly! Why had she singled him out?

The answer came when he was calm enough to listen for it. Because
Mary had no other friend capable of the duty required of him; the
duty of a brother, as Esther imagined him to be in feeling, from his
long friendship. He would be unto her as a brother.

As such, he ought to ascertain Harry Carson's intentions towards
her in winning her affections. He would ask him, straightforwardly,
as became man speaking to man, not concealing, if need were, the
interest he felt in Mary.

Then, with the resolve to do his duty to the best of his power, peace
came into his soul; he had left the windy storm and tempest behind.

Two hours before day-dawn he fell asleep.




CHAPTER XV.

A VIOLENT MEETING BETWEEN THE RIVALS.


   "What thoughtful heart can look into this gulf
   That darkly yawns 'twixt rich and poor,
   And not find food for saddest meditation!
   Can see, without a pang of keenest grief,
   Them fiercely battling (like some natural foes)
   Whom God had made, with help and sympathy,
   To stand as brothers, side by side, united!
   Where is the wisdom that shall bridge this gulf,
   And bind them once again in trust and love?"

   "LOVE-TRUTHS."


We must return to John Barton. Poor John! He never got over his
disappointing journey to London. The deep mortification he then
experienced (with, perhaps, as little selfishness for its cause as
mortification ever had) was of no temporary nature; indeed, few of
his feelings were.

Then came a long period of bodily privation; of daily hunger after
food; and though he tried to persuade himself he could bear want
himself with stoical indifference, and did care about it as little
as most men, yet the body took its revenge for its uneasy feelings.
The mind became soured and morose, and lost much of its equipoise.
It was no longer elastic, as in the days of youth, or in times of
comparative happiness; it ceased to hope. And it is hard to live on
when one can no longer hope.

The same state of feeling which John Barton entertained, if belonging
to one who had had leisure to think of such things, and physicians to
give names to them, would have been called monomania; so haunting, so
incessant, were the thoughts that pressed upon him. I have somewhere
read a forcibly described punishment among the Italians, worthy of a
Borgia. The supposed or real criminal was shut up in a room, supplied
with every convenience and luxury; and at first mourned little
over his imprisonment. But day by day he became aware that the
space between the walls of his apartment was narrowing, and then
he understood the end. Those painted walls would come into hideous
nearness, and at last crush the life out of him.

And so day by day, nearer and nearer, came the diseased thoughts of
John Barton. They excluded the light of heaven, the cheering sounds
of earth. They were preparing his death.

It is true, much of their morbid power might be ascribed to the use
of opium. But before you blame too harshly this use, or rather abuse,
try a hopeless life, with daily cravings of the body for food. Try,
not alone being without hope yourself, but seeing all around you
reduced to the same despair, arising from the same circumstances; all
around you telling (though they use no words or language), by their
looks and feeble actions, that they are suffering and sinking under
the pressure of want. Would you not be glad to forget life, and its
burdens? And opium gives forgetfulness for a time.

It is true they who thus purchase it pay dearly for their oblivion;
but can you expect the uneducated to count the cost of their whistle?
Poor wretches! They pay a heavy price. Days of oppressive weariness
and languor, whose realities have the feeble sickliness of dreams;
nights, whose dreams are fierce realities of agony; sinking health,
tottering frames, incipient madness, and worse, the _consciousness_
of incipient madness; this is the price of their whistle. But have
you taught them the science of consequences?

John Barton's overpowering thought, which was to work out his fate on
earth, was rich and poor; why are they so separate, so distinct, when
God has made them all? It is not His will, that their interests are
so far apart. Whose doing is it?

And so on into the problems and mysteries of life, until, bewildered
and lost, unhappy and suffering, the only feeling that remained clear
and undisturbed in the tumult of his heart, was hatred to the one
class and keen sympathy with the other.

But what availed his sympathy? No education had given him wisdom;
and without wisdom, even love, with all its effects, too often
works but harm. He acted to the best of his judgment, but it was a
widely-erring judgment.

The actions of the uneducated seem to me typified in those of
Frankenstein, that monster of many human qualities, ungifted with a
soul, a knowledge of the difference between good and evil.

The people rise up to life; they irritate us, they terrify us, and we
become their enemies. Then, in the sorrowful moment of our triumphant
power, their eyes gaze on us with a mute reproach. Why have we made
them what they are; a powerful monster, yet without the inner means
for peace and happiness?

John Barton became a Chartist, a Communist, all that is commonly
called wild and visionary. Ay! but being visionary is something. It
shows a soul, a being not altogether sensual; a creature who looks
forward for others, if not for himself.

And with all his weakness he had a sort of practical power, which
made him useful to the bodies of men to whom he belonged. He had a
ready kind of rough Lancashire eloquence, arising out of the fulness
of his heart, which was very stirring to men similarly circumstanced,
who liked to hear their feelings put into words. He had a pretty
clear head at times, for method and arrangement; a necessary talent
to large combinations of men. And what perhaps more than all made him
relied upon and valued, was the consciousness which every one who
came in contact with him felt, that he was actuated by no selfish
motives; that his class, his order, was what he stood by, not the
rights of his own paltry self. For even in great and noble men, as
soon as self comes into prominent existence, it becomes a mean and
paltry thing.

A little time before this, there had come one of those occasions for
deliberation among the employed, which deeply interested John Barton;
and the discussions concerning which had caused his frequent absence
from home of late.

I am not sure if I can express myself in the technical terms of
either masters or workmen, but I will try simply to state the case on
which the latter deliberated.

An order for coarse goods came in from a new foreign market. It was
a large order, giving employment to all the mills engaged in that
species of manufacture: but it was necessary to execute it speedily,
and at as low prices as possible, as the masters had reason to
believe a duplicate order had been sent to one of the continental
manufacturing towns, where there were no restrictions on food, no
taxes on building or machinery, and where consequently they dreaded
that the goods could be made at a much lower price than they could
afford them for; and that, by so acting and charging, the rival
manufacturers would obtain undivided possession of the market. It was
clearly their interest to buy cotton as cheaply, and to beat down
wages as low as possible. And in the long run the interests of the
workmen would have been thereby benefited. Distrust each other as
they may, the employers and the employed must rise or fall together.
There may be some difference as to chronology, none as to fact.

But the masters did not choose to make all these facts known. They
stood upon being the masters, and that they had a right to order work
at their own prices, and they believed that in the present depression
of trade, and unemployment of hands, there would be no great
difficulty in getting it done.

Now let us turn to the workmen's view of the question. The masters
(of the tottering foundation of whose prosperity they were ignorant)
seemed doing well, and like gentlemen, "lived at home in ease," while
they were starving, gasping on from day to day; and there was a
foreign order to be executed, the extent of which, large as it was,
was greatly exaggerated; and it was to be done speedily. Why were the
masters offering such low wages under these circumstances? Shame
upon them! It was taking advantage of their work-people being almost
starved; but they would starve entirely rather than come into such
terms. It was bad enough to be poor, while by the labour of their
thin hands, the sweat of their brows, the masters were made rich; but
they would not be utterly ground down to dust. No! they would fold
their hands, and sit idle, and smile at the masters, whom even in
death they could baffle. With Spartan endurance they determined to
let the employers know their power, by refusing to work.

So class distrusted class, and their want of mutual confidence
wrought sorrow to both. The masters would not be bullied, and
compelled to reveal why they felt it wisest and best to offer only
such low wages; they would not be made to tell that they were even
sacrificing capital to obtain a decisive victory over the continental
manufacturers. And the workmen sat silent and stern with folded
hands, refusing to work for such pay. There was a strike in
Manchester.

Of course it was succeeded by the usual consequences. Many other
Trades' Unions, connected with different branches of business,
supported with money, countenance, and encouragement of every kind,
the stand which the Manchester power-loom weavers were making against
their masters. Delegates from Glasgow, from Nottingham, and other
towns, were sent to Manchester, to keep up the spirit of resistance;
a committee was formed, and all the requisite officers elected;
chairman, treasurer, honorary secretary:--among them was John Barton.

The masters, meanwhile, took their measures. They placarded the walls
with advertisements for power-loom weavers. The workmen replied by
a placard in still larger letters, stating their grievances. The
masters met daily in town, to mourn over the time (so fast slipping
away) for the fulfilment of the foreign orders; and to strengthen
each other in their resolution not to yield. If they gave up now,
they might give up always. It would never do. And amongst the
most energetic of the masters, the Carsons, father and son, took
their places. It is well known, that there is no religionist so
zealous as a convert; no masters so stern, and regardless of the
interests of their work-people, as those who have risen from such a
station themselves. This would account for the elder Mr. Carson's
determination not to be bullied into yielding; not even to be bullied
into giving reasons for acting as the masters did. It was the
employer's will, and that should be enough for the employed. Harry
Carson did not trouble himself much about the grounds for his
conduct. He liked the excitement of the affair. He liked the attitude
of resistance. He was brave, and he liked the idea of personal
danger, with which some of the more cautious tried to intimidate the
violent among the masters.

Meanwhile, the power-loom weavers living in the more remote parts
of Lancashire, and the neighbouring counties, heard of the masters'
advertisements for workmen; and in their solitary dwellings grew
weary of starvation, and resolved to come to Manchester. Foot-sore,
way-worn, half-starved looking men they were, as they tried to steal
into town in the early dawn, before people were astir, or late in the
dusk of evening. And now began the real wrong-doing of the Trades'
Unions. As to their decision to work, or not, at such a particular
rate of wages, that was either wise or unwise; all error of judgment
at the worst. But they had no right to tyrannise over others, and
tie them down to their own procrustean bed. Abhorring what they
considered oppression in the masters, why did they oppress others?
Because, when men get excited, they know not what they do. Judge,
then, with something of the mercy of the Holy One, whom we all love.

In spite of policemen set to watch over the safety of the poor
country weavers,--in spite of magistrates, and prisons, and severe
punishments,--the poor depressed men tramping in from Burnley,
Padiham, and other places, to work at the condemned "Starvation
Prices," were waylaid, and beaten, and left almost for dead by the
road-side. The police broke up every lounging knot of men:--they
separated quietly, to reunite half-a-mile further out of town.

Of course the feeling between the masters and workmen did not improve
under these circumstances.

Combination is an awful power. It is like the equally mighty agency
of steam; capable of almost unlimited good or evil. But to obtain
a blessing on its labours, it must work under the direction of a
high and intelligent will; incapable of being misled by passion, or
excitement. The will of the operatives had not been guided to the
calmness of wisdom.

So much for generalities. Let us now return to individuals.

A note, respectfully worded, although its tone of determination was
strong, had been sent from the power-loom weavers, requesting that a
"deputation" of them might have a meeting with the masters, to state
the conditions they must have fulfilled before they would end the
turn-out. They thought they had attained a sufficiently commanding
position to dictate. John Barton was appointed one of the deputation.

The masters agreed to this meeting, being anxious to end the strife,
although undetermined among themselves how far they should yield, or
whether they should yield at all. Some of the old, whose experience
had taught them sympathy, were for concession. Others, white-headed
men too, had only learnt hardness and obstinacy from the days of the
years of their lives, and sneered at the more gentle and yielding.
The younger men were one and all for an unflinching resistance to
claims urged with so much violence. Of this party Harry Carson was
the leader.

But like all energetic people, the more he had to do the more time
he seemed to find. With all his letter-writing, his calling, his
being present at the New Bailey, when investigations of any case
of violence against knob-sticks [44] were going on, he beset Mary
more than ever. She was weary of her life for him. From blandishments
he had even gone to threats--threats that whether she would or
not she should be his; he showed an indifference that was almost
insulting to every thing that might attract attention and injure her
character.


   [Footnote 44: "Knob-sticks," those who consent to work at
                 lower wages.]


And still she never saw Jem. She knew he had returned home. She heard
of him occasionally through his cousin, who roved gaily from house to
house, finding and making friends everywhere. But she never saw him.
What was she to think? Had he given her up? Were a few hasty words,
spoken in a moment of irritation, to stamp her lot through life? At
times she thought that she could bear this meekly, happy in her own
constant power of loving. For of change or of forgetfulness she did
not dream. Then at other times her state of impatience was such, that
it required all her self-restraint to prevent her from going and
seeking him out, and (as man would do to man, or woman to woman)
begging him to forgive her hasty words, and allow her to retract
them, and bidding him accept of the love that was filling her whole
heart. She wished Margaret had not advised her against such a manner
of proceeding; she believed it was her friend's words that seemed to
make such a simple action impossible, in spite of all the internal
urgings. But a friend's advice is only thus powerful, when it puts
into language the secret oracle of our souls. It was the whisperings
of her womanly nature that caused her to shrink from any unmaidenly
action, not Margaret's counsel.

All this time, this ten days or so, of Will's visit to Manchester,
there was something going on which interested Mary even now, and
which, in former times, would have exceedingly amused and excited
her. She saw as clearly as if told in words, that the merry, random,
boisterous sailor had fallen deeply in love with the quiet, prim,
somewhat plain Margaret: she doubted if Margaret was aware of it, and
yet, as she watched more closely, she began to think some instinct
made the blind girl feel whose eyes were so often fixed upon her
pale face; that some inner feeling made the delicate and becoming
rose-flush steal over her countenance. She did not speak so decidedly
as before; there was a hesitation in her manner, that seemed to make
her very attractive; as if something softer, more loveable than
excellent sense, were coming in as a motive for speech; her eyes had
always been soft, and were in no ways disfigured by her blindness,
and now seemed to have a new charm, as they quivered under their
white down-cast lids. She must be conscious, thought Mary,--heart
answering heart.

Will's love had no blushings, no downcast eyes, no weighing of words;
it was as open and undisguised as his nature; yet he seemed afraid
of the answer its acknowledgment might meet with. It was Margaret's
angelic voice that had entranced him, and which made him think of her
as a being of some other sphere, that he feared to woo. So he tried
to propitiate Job in all manner of ways. He went over to Liverpool to
rummage in his great sea-chest for the flying-fish (no very odorous
present by the way). He hesitated over a child's caul for some time,
which was, in his eyes, a far greater treasure than any Exocetus.
What use could it be of to a landsman? Then Margaret's voice rang
in his ears; and he determined to sacrifice it, his most precious
possession, to one whom she loved, as she did her grandfather.

It was rather a relief to him, when, having put it and the
flying-fish together in a brown paper parcel, and sat upon them
for security all the way in the railroad, he found that Job was so
indifferent to the precious caul, that he might easily claim it
again. He hung about Margaret, till he had received many warnings and
reproaches from his conscience in behalf of his dear aunt Alice's
claims upon his time. He went away, and then he bethought him of some
other little word with Job. And he turned back, and stood talking
once more in Margaret's presence, door in hand, only waiting for some
little speech of encouragement to come in and sit down again. But as
the invitation was not given, he was forced to leave at last, and go
and do his duty.

Four days had Jem Wilson watched for Mr. Harry Carson without
success; his hours of going and returning to his home were so
irregular, owing to the meetings and consultations among the masters,
which were rendered necessary by the turn-out. On the fifth, without
any purpose on Jem's part, they met.

It was the workmen's dinner-hour, the interval between twelve and
one; when the streets of Manchester are comparatively quiet, for
a few shopping ladies and lounging gentlemen count for nothing in
that busy, bustling, living place. Jem had been on an errand for his
master, instead of returning to his dinner; and in passing along a
lane, a road (called, in compliment to the intentions of some future
builder, a street), he encountered Harry Carson, the only person, as
far as he saw beside himself, treading the unfrequented path. Along
one side ran a high broad fence, blackened over by coal-tar, and
spiked and stuck with pointed nails at the top, to prevent any one
from climbing over into the garden beyond. By this fence was the
foot-path. The carriage road was such as no carriage, no, not even a
cart, could possibly have passed along, without Hercules to assist
in lifting it out of the deep clay ruts. On the other side of the
way was a dead brick wall; and a field after that, where there was a
sawpit, and joiner's shed.

Jem's heart beat violently when he saw the gay, handsome young man
approaching, with a light, buoyant step. This, then, was he whom Mary
loved. It was, perhaps, no wonder; for he seemed to the poor smith
so elegant, so well-appointed, that he felt his superiority in
externals, strangely and painfully, for an instant. Then something
uprose within him, and told him, that "a man's a man for a' that,
for a' that, and twice as much as a' that." And he no longer felt
troubled by the outward appearance of his rival.

Harry Carson came on, lightly bounding over the dirty places with
almost a lad's buoyancy. To his surprise the dark, sturdy-looking
artisan stopped him by saying respectfully,

"May I speak a word wi' you, sir?"

"Certainly, my good man," looking his astonishment; then finding that
the promised speech did not come very quickly, he added, "But make
haste, for I'm in a hurry."

Jem had cast about for some less abrupt way of broaching the subject
uppermost in his mind than he now found himself obliged to use. With
a husky voice that trembled as he spoke, he said,

"I think, sir, yo're keeping company wi' a young woman called Mary
Barton?"

A light broke in upon Harry Carson's mind, and he paused before he
gave the answer for which the other waited.

Could this man be a lover of Mary's? And (strange, stinging thought)
could he be beloved by her, and so have caused her obstinate
rejection of himself? He looked at Jem from head to foot, a black,
grimy mechanic, in dirty fustian clothes, strongly built, and awkward
(according to the dancing-master); then he glanced at himself, and
recalled the reflection he had so lately quitted in his bed-room.
It was impossible. No woman with eyes could choose the one when the
other wooed. It was Hyperion to a Satyr. That quotation came aptly;
he forgot "That a man's a man for a' that." And yet here was a clue,
which he had often wanted, to her changed conduct towards him. If she
loved this man. If-- he hated the fellow, and longed to strike him.
He would know all.

"Mary Barton! let me see. Ay, that is the name of the girl. An arrant
flirt, the little hussy is; but very pretty. Ay, Mary Barton is her
name."

Jem bit his lips. Was it then so; that Mary was a flirt, the giddy
creature of whom he spoke? He would not believe it, and yet how he
wished the suggestive words unspoken. That thought must keep now,
though. Even if she were, the more reason for there being some one to
protect her; poor, faulty darling.

"She's a good girl, sir, though may be a bit set up with her beauty;
but she's her father's only child, sir, and--" he stopped; he did
not like to express suspicion, and yet he was determined he would be
certain there was ground for none. What should he say?

"Well, my fine fellow, and what have I to do with that? It's but loss
of my time, and yours, too, if you've only stopped me to tell me Mary
Barton is very pretty; I know that well enough."

He seemed as though he would have gone on, but Jem put his black,
working, right hand upon his arm to detain him. The haughty young man
shook it off, and with his glove pretended to brush away the sooty
contamination that might be left upon his light great-coat sleeve.
The little action aroused Jem.

"I will tell you in plain words what I have got to say to you, young
man. It's been telled me by one as knows, and has seen, that you walk
with this same Mary Barton, and are known to be courting her; and her
as spoke to me about it, thinks as how Mary loves you. That may be,
or may not. But I'm an old friend of hers, and her father's; and I
just wished to know if you mean to marry the girl. Spite of what you
said of her lightness, I ha' known her long enough to be sure she'll
make a noble wife for any one, let him be what he may; and I mean
to stand by her like a brother; and if you mean rightly, you'll not
think the worse on me for what I've now said; and if--but no, I'll
not say what I'll do to the man who wrongs a hair of her head. He
shall rue it the longest day he lives, that's all. Now, sir, what
I ask of you is this. If you mean fair and honourable by her, well
and good; but if not, for your own sake as well as hers, leave her
alone, and never speak to her more." Jem's voice quivered with the
earnestness with which he spoke, and he eagerly waited for some
answer.

Harry Carson, meanwhile, instead of attending very particularly to
the purpose the man had in addressing him, was trying to gather from
his speech what was the real state of the case. He succeeded so far
as to comprehend that Jem inclined to believe that Mary loved his
rival; and consequently, that if the speaker were attached to her
himself, he was not a favoured admirer. The idea came into Mr.
Carson's mind, that perhaps, after all, Mary loved him in spite of
her frequent and obstinate rejections; and that she had employed this
person (whoever he was) to bully him into marrying her. He resolved
to try and ascertain more correctly the man's relation to her. Either
he was a lover, and if so, not a favoured one (in which case Mr.
Carson could not at all understand the man's motives for interesting
himself in securing her marriage); or he was a friend, an accomplice,
whom she had employed to bully him. So little faith in goodness have
the mean and selfish!

"Before I make you into my confidant, my good man," said Mr. Carson,
in a contemptuous tone, "I think it might be as well to inquire your
right to meddle with our affairs. Neither Mary nor I, as I conceive,
called you in as a mediator." He paused; he wanted a distinct answer
to this last supposition. None came; so he began to imagine he was to
be threatened into some engagement, and his angry spirit rose.

"And so, my fine fellow, you will have the kindness to leave us to
ourselves, and not meddle with what does not concern you. If you were
a brother, or father of hers, the case might have been different. As
it is, I can only consider you an impertinent meddler."

Again he would have passed on, but Jem stood in a determined way
before him, saying,

"You say if I had been her brother, or her father, you'd have
answered me what I ask. Now, neither father nor brother could love
her as I have loved her, ay, and as I love her still; if love gives a
right to satisfaction, it's next to impossible any one breathing can
come up to my right. Now, sir, tell me! do you mean fair by Mary or
not? I've proved my claim to know, and, by G----, I will know."

"Come, come, no impudence," replied Mr. Carson, who, having
discovered what he wanted to know (namely, that Jem was a lover of
Mary's, and that she was not encouraging his suit), wished to pass
on.

"Father, brother, or rejected lover" (with an emphasis on the word
rejected), "no one has a right to interfere between my little
girl and me. No one shall. Confound you, man! get out of my way,
or I'll make you," as Jem still obstructed his path with dogged
determination.

"I won't, then, till you've given me your word about Mary," replied
the mechanic, grinding his words out between his teeth, and the livid
paleness of the anger he could no longer keep down covering his face
till he looked ghastly.

"Won't you?" (with a taunting laugh), "then I'll make you." The young
man raised his slight cane, and smote the artisan across the face
with a stinging stroke. An instant afterwards he lay stretched in the
muddy road, Jem standing over him, panting with rage. What he would
have done next in his moment of ungovernable passion, no one knows;
but a policeman from the main street, into which this road led, had
been sauntering about for some time, unobserved by either of the
parties, and expecting some kind of conclusion like the present to
the violent discussion going on between the two young men. In a
minute he had pinioned Jem, who sullenly yielded to the surprise.

Mr. Carson was on his feet directly, his face glowing with rage or
shame.

"Shall I take him to the lock-ups for assault, sir?" said the
policeman.

"No, no," exclaimed Mr. Carson; "I struck him first. It was no
assault on his side; though," he continued, hissing out his words
to Jem, who even hated freedom procured for him, however justly, at
the intervention of his rival, "I will never forgive or forget your
insult. Trust me," he gasped the words in excess of passion, "Mary
shall fare no better for your insolent interference." He laughed, as
if with the consciousness of power.

Jem replied with equal excitement--"And if you dare to injure her in
the least, I will await you where no policeman can step in between.
And God shall judge between us two."

The policeman now interfered with persuasions and warnings. He locked
his arm in Jem's to lead him away in an opposite direction to that in
which he saw Mr. Carson was going. Jem submitted gloomily, for a few
steps, then wrenched himself free. The policeman shouted after him,

"Take care, my man! there's no girl on earth worth what you'll be
bringing on yourself if you don't mind."

But Jem was out of hearing.




CHAPTER XVI.

MEETING BETWEEN MASTERS AND WORKMEN.


   "Not for a moment take the scorner's chair;
   While seated there, thou know'st not how a word,
   A tone, a look, may gall thy brother's heart,
   And make him turn in bitterness against thee."

   "LOVE-TRUTHS."


The day arrived on which the masters were to have an interview with
a deputation of the work-people. The meeting was to take place in
a public room, at an hotel; and there, about eleven o'clock, the
mill-owners, who had received the foreign orders, began to collect.

Of course, the first subject, however full their minds might be of
another, was the weather. Having done their duty by all the showers
and sunshine which had occurred during the past week, they fell to
talking about the business which brought them together. There might
be about twenty gentlemen in the room, including some by courtesy,
who were not immediately concerned in the settlement of the present
question; but who, nevertheless, were sufficiently interested to
attend. These were divided into little groups, who did not seem
unanimous by any means. Some were for a slight concession, just
a sugar-plum to quieten the naughty child, a sacrifice to peace
and quietness. Some were steadily and vehemently opposed to the
dangerous precedent of yielding one jot or one tittle to the outward
force of a turn-out. It was teaching the work-people how to become
masters, said they. Did they want the wildest thing heareafter, they
would know that the way to obtain their wishes would be to strike
work. Besides, one or two of those present had only just returned
from the New Bailey, where one of the turn-outs had been tried for a
cruel assault on a poor north-country weaver, who had attempted to
work at the low price. They were indignant, and justly so, at the
merciless manner in which the poor fellow had been treated; and their
indignation at wrong, took (as it so often does) the extreme form of
revenge. They felt as if, rather than yield to the body of men who
were resorting to such cruel measures towards their fellow-workmen,
they, the masters, would sooner relinquish all the benefits to be
derived from the fulfilment of the commission, in order that the
workmen might suffer keenly. They forgot that the strike was in this
instance the consequence of want and need, suffered unjustly, as the
endurers believed; for, however insane, and without ground of reason,
such was their belief, and such was the cause of their violence. It
is a great truth, that you cannot extinguish violence by violence.
You may put it down for a time; but while you are crowing over your
imaginary success, see if it does not return with seven devils worse
than its former self!

No one thought of treating the workmen as brethren and friends, and
openly, clearly, as appealing to reasonable men, stating the exact
and full circumstances which led the masters to think it was the wise
policy of the time to make sacrifices themselves, and to hope for
them from the operatives.

In going from group to group in the room, you caught such a medley of
sentences as the following:

"Poor devils! they're near enough to starving, I'm afraid. Mrs.
Aldred makes two cows' heads into soup every week, and people come
several miles to fetch it; and if these times last we must try and do
more. But we must not be bullied into any thing!"

"A rise of a shilling or so won't make much difference, and they will
go away thinking they've gained their point."

"That's the very thing I object to. They'll think so, and whenever
they've a point to gain, no matter how unreasonable, they'll strike
work."

"It really injures them more than us."

"I don't see how our interests can be separated."

"The d----d brute had thrown vitriol on the poor fellow's ankles, and
you know what a bad part that is to heal. He had to stand still with
the pain, and that left him at the mercy of the cruel wretch, who
beat him about the head till you'd hardly have known he was a man.
They doubt if he'll live."

"If it were only for that, I'll stand out against them, even if it
were the cause of my ruin."

"Ay, I for one won't yield one farthing to the cruel brutes; they're
more like wild beasts than human beings."

(Well! who might have made them different?)

"I say, Carson, just go and tell Duncombe of this fresh instance of
their abominable conduct. He's wavering, but I think this will decide
him."

The door was now opened, and a waiter announced that the men were
below, and asked if it were the pleasure of the gentlemen that they
should be shown up.

They assented, and rapidly took their places round the official
table; looking, as like as they could, to the Roman senators who
awaited the irruption of Brennus and his Gauls.

Tramp, tramp, came the heavy clogged feet up the stairs; and in a
minute five wild, earnest-looking men stood in the room. John Barton,
from some mistake as to time, was not among them. Had they been
larger boned men, you would have called them gaunt; as it was, they
were little of stature, and their fustian clothes hung loosely upon
their shrunk limbs. In choosing their delegates, too, the operatives
had had more regard to their brains, and power of speech, than to
their wardrobes; they might have read the opinions of that worthy
Professor Teufelsdruch, in Sartor Resartus, to judge from the
dilapidated coats and trousers, which yet clothed men of parts and
of power. It was long since many of them had known the luxury of a
new article of dress; and air-gaps were to be seen in their garments.
Some of the masters were rather affronted at such a ragged detachment
coming between the wind and their nobility; but what cared they?

At the request of a gentleman hastily chosen to officiate as
chairman, the leader of the delegates read, in a high-pitched,
psalm-singing voice, a paper, containing the operatives' statement of
the case at issue, their complaints, and their demands, which last
were not remarkable for moderation.

He was then desired to withdraw for a few minutes, with his fellow
delegates, to another room, while the masters considered what should
be their definitive answer.

When the men had left the room, a whispered earnest consultation
took place, every one re-urging his former arguments. The conceders
carried the day, but only by a majority of one. The minority
haughtily and audibly expressed their dissent from the measures to be
adopted, even after the delegates re-entered the room; their words
and looks did not pass unheeded by the quick-eyed operatives; their
names were registered in bitter hearts.

The masters could not consent to the advance demanded by the workmen.
They would agree to give one shilling per week more than they had
previously offered. Were the delegates empowered to accept such
offer?

They were empowered to accept or decline any offer made that day by
the masters.

Then it might be as well for them to consult among themselves as to
what should be their decision. They again withdrew.

It was not for long. They came back, and positively declined any
compromise of their demands.

Then up sprang Mr. Henry Carson, the head and voice of the violent
party among the masters, and addressing the chairman, even before
the scowling operatives, he proposed some resolutions, which he,
and those who agreed with him, had been concocting during this last
absence of the deputation.

They were, firstly, withdrawing the proposal just made, and declaring
all communication between the masters and that particular Trades'
Union at an end; secondly, declaring that no master would employ any
workman in future, unless he signed a declaration that he did not
belong to any Trades' Union, and pledged himself not to assist or
subscribe to any society, having for its object interference with
the masters' powers; and, thirdly, that the masters should pledge
themselves to protect and encourage all workmen willing to accept
employment on those conditions, and at the rate of wages first
offered. Considering that the men who now stood listening with
lowering brows of defiance were all of them leading members of the
Union, such resolutions were in themselves sufficiently provocative
of animosity: but not content with simply stating them, Harry Carson
went on to characterise the conduct of the workmen in no measured
terms; every word he spoke rendering their looks more livid, their
glaring eyes more fierce. One among them would have spoken, but
checked himself in obedience to the stern glance and pressure on his
arm, received from the leader. Mr. Carson sat down, and a friend
instantly got up to second the motion. It was carried, but far from
unanimously. The chairman announced it to the delegates (who had been
once more turned out of the room for a division). They received it
with deep brooding silence, but spake never a word, and left the room
without even a bow.

Now there had been some by-play at this meeting, not recorded in the
Manchester newspapers, which gave an account of the more regular part
of the transaction.

While the men had stood grouped near the door, on their first
entrance, Mr. Harry Carson had taken out his silver pencil, and had
drawn an admirable caricature of them--lank, ragged, dispirited, and
famine-stricken. Underneath he wrote a hasty quotation from the fat
knight's well-known speech in Henry IV. He passed it to one of his
neighbours, who acknowledged the likeness instantly, and by him it
was sent round to others, who all smiled and nodded their heads.
When it came back to its owner he tore the back of the letter on
which it was drawn, in two; twisted them up, and flung them into
the fire-place; but, careless whether they reached their aim or not,
he did not look to see that they fell just short of any consuming
cinders.

This proceeding was closely observed by one of the men.

He watched the masters as they left the hotel (laughing, some of them
were, at passing jokes), and when all had gone, he re-entered. He
went to the waiter, who recognised him.

"There's a bit on a picture up yonder, as one o' the gentlemen threw
away; I've a little lad at home as dearly loves a picture; by your
leave I'll go up for it."

The waiter, good-natured and sympathetic, accompanied him up-stairs;
saw the paper picked up and untwisted, and then being convinced, by
a hasty glance at its contents, that it was only what the man had
called it, "a bit of a picture," he allowed him to bear away his
prize.

Towards seven o'clock that evening many operatives began to assemble
in a room in the Weavers' Arms public-house, a room appropriated for
"festive occasions," as the landlord, in his circular, on opening the
premises, had described it. But, alas! it was on no festive occasion
that they met there on this night. Starved, irritated, despairing
men, they were assembling to hear the answer that morning given by
the masters to their delegates; after which, as was stated in the
notice, a gentleman from London would have the honour of addressing
the meeting on the present state of affairs between the employers
and the employed, or (as he chose to term them) the idle and the
industrious classes. The room was not large, but its bareness of
furniture made it appear so. Unshaded gas flared down upon the lean
and unwashed artisans as they entered, their eyes blinking at the
excess of light.

They took their seats on benches, and awaited the deputation. The
latter, gloomily and ferociously, delivered the masters' ultimatum,
adding thereunto not one word of their own; and it sank all the
deeper into the sore hearts of the listeners for their forbearance.

Then the "gentleman from London" (who had been previously informed of
the masters' decision) entered. You would have been puzzled to define
his exact position, or what was the state of his mind as regarded
education. He looked so self-conscious, so far from earnest, among
the group of eager, fierce, absorbed men, among whom he now stood. He
might have been a disgraced medical student of the Bob Sawyer class,
or an unsuccessful actor, or a flashy shopman. The impression he
would have given you would have been unfavourable, and yet there was
much about him that could only be characterised as doubtful.

He smirked in acknowledgment of their uncouth greetings, and sat
down; then glancing round, he inquired whether it would not be
agreeable to the gentlemen present to have pipes and liquor handed
round; adding, that he would stand treat.

As the man who has had his taste educated to love reading, falls
devouringly upon books after a long abstinence, so these poor
fellows, whose tastes had been left to educate themselves into a
liking for tobacco, beer, and similar gratifications, gleamed up at
the proposal of the London delegate. Tobacco and drink deaden the
pangs of hunger, and make one forget the miserable home, the desolate
future.

They were now ready to listen to him with approbation. He felt it;
and rising like a great orator, with his right arm outstretched, his
left in the breast of his waistcoat, he began to declaim, with a
forced theatrical voice.

After a burst of eloquence, in which he blended the deeds of
the elder and the younger Brutus, and magnified the resistless
might of the "millions of Manchester," the Londoner descended to
matter-of-fact business, and in his capacity this way he did not
belie the good judgment of those who had sent him as delegate.
Masses of people, when left to their own free choice, seem to have
discretion in distinguishing men of natural talent; it is a pity
they so little regard temper and principles. He rapidly dictated
resolutions, and suggested measures. He wrote out a stirring
placard for the walls. He proposed sending delegates to entreat the
assistance of other Trades' Unions in other towns. He headed the list
of subscribing Unions, by a liberal donation from that with which
he was especially connected in London; and what was more, and more
uncommon, he paid down the money in real, clinking, blinking, golden
sovereigns! The money, alas, was cravingly required; but before
alleviating any private necessities on the morrow, small sums were
handed to each of the delegates, who were in a day or two to set out
on their expeditions to Glasgow, Newcastle, Nottingham, &c. These
men were most of them members of the deputation who had that morning
waited upon the masters. After he had drawn up some letters, and
spoken a few more stirring words, the gentleman from London withdrew,
previously shaking hands all round; and many speedily followed him
out of the room, and out of the house.

The newly-appointed delegates, and one or two others, remained behind
to talk over their respective missions, and to give and exchange
opinions in more homely and natural language than they dared to use
before the London orator.

"He's a rare chap, yon," began one, indicating the departed delegate
by a jerk of his thumb towards the door. "He's gotten the gift of the
gab, anyhow!"

"Ay! ay! he knows what he's about. See how he poured it into us about
that there Brutus. He were pretty hard, too, to kill his own son!"

"I could kill mine if he took part wi' the masters; to be sure, he's
but a step-son, but that makes no odds," said another.

But now tongues were hushed, and all eyes were directed towards the
member of the deputation who had that morning returned to the hotel
to obtain possession of Harry Carson's clever caricature of the
operatives.

The heads clustered together, to gaze at and detect the likenesses.

"That's John Slater! I'd ha' known him anywhere, by his big nose.
Lord! how like; that's me, by G----, it's the very way I'm obligated
to pin my waistcoat up, to hide that I've gotten no shirt. That _is_
a shame, and I'll not stand it."

"Well!" said John Slater, after having acknowledged his nose and his
likeness; "I could laugh at a jest as well as e'er the best on 'em,
though it did tell again mysel, if I were not clemming" (his eyes
filled with tears; he was a poor, pinched, sharp-featured man, with
a gentle and melancholy expression of countenance), "and if I could
keep from thinking of them at home, as is clemming; but with their
cries for food ringing in my ears, and making me afeard of going
home, and wonder if I should hear 'em wailing out, if I lay cold and
drowned at th' bottom o' th' canal, there,--why, man, I cannot laugh
at ought. It seems to make me sad that there is any as can make game
on what they've never knowed; as can make such laughable pictures on
men, whose very hearts within 'em are so raw and sore as ours were
and are, God help us."

John Barton began to speak; they turned to him with great attention.
"It makes me more than sad, it makes my heart burn within me, to see
that folk can make a jest of earnest men; of chaps who comed to ask
for a bit o' fire for th' old granny, as shivers in th' cold; for a
bit o' bedding, and some warm clothing to the poor wife as lies in
labour on th' damp flags; and for victuals for the childer, whose
little voices are getting too faint and weak to cry aloud wi' hunger.
For, brothers, is not them the things we ask for when we ask for more
wage? We donnot want dainties, we want bellyfuls; we donnot want
gimcrack coats and waistcoats, we want warm clothes, and so that we
get 'em we'd not quarrel wi' what they're made on. We donnot want
their grand houses, we want a roof to cover us from the rain, and the
snow, and the storm; ay, and not alone to cover us, but the helpless
ones that cling to us in the keen wind, and ask us with their eyes
why we brought 'em into th' world to suffer?" He lowered his deep
voice almost to a whisper.

"I've seen a father who had killed his child rather than let it clem
before his eyes; and he were a tender-hearted man."

He began again in his usual tone. "We come to th' masters wi' full
hearts, to ask for them things I named afore. We know that they've
gotten money, as we've earned for 'em; we know trade is mending, and
that they've large orders, for which they'll be well paid; we ask for
our share o' th' payment; for, say we, if th' masters get our share
of payment it will only go to keep servants and horses, to more dress
and pomp. Well and good, if yo choose to be fools we'll not hinder
you, so long as you're just; but our share we must and will have;
we'll not be cheated. _We_ want it for daily bread, for life itself;
and not for our own lives neither (for there's many a one here, I
know by mysel, as would be glad and thankful to lie down and die out
o' this weary world), but for the lives of them little ones, who
don't yet know what life is, and are afeard of death. Well, we come
before th' masters to state what we want, and what we must have,
afore we'll set shoulder to their work; and they say, 'No.' One would
think that would be enough of hard-heartedness, but it isn't. They go
and make jesting pictures of us! I could laugh at mysel, as well as
poor John Slater there; but then I must be easy in my mind to laugh.
Now I only know that I would give the last drop o' my blood to avenge
us on yon chap, who had so little feeling in him as to make game on
earnest, suffering men!"

A low angry murmur was heard among the men, but it did not yet take
form or words. John continued--

"You'll wonder, chaps, how I came to miss the time this morning; I'll
just tell you what I was a-doing. Th' chaplain at the New Bailey sent
and gived me an order to see Jonas Higginbotham; him as was taken
up last week for throwing vitriol in a knob-stick's face. Well, I
couldn't help but go; and I didn't reckon it would ha' kept me so
late. Jonas were like one crazy when I got to him; he said he could
na get rest night or day for th' face of the poor fellow he had
damaged; then he thought on his weak, clemmed look, as he tramped,
foot-sore, into town; and Jonas thought, may be, he had left them
at home as would look for news, and hope and get none, but, haply,
tidings of his death. Well, Jonas had thought on these things till he
could not rest, but walked up and down continually like a wild beast
in his cage. At last he bethought him on a way to help a bit, and he
got th' chaplain to send for me; and he telled me this; and that th'
man were lying in th' Infirmary, and he bade me go (to-day's the day
as folk may be admitted into th' Infirmary) and get his silver watch,
as was his mother's, and sell it as well as I could, and take the
money, and bid the poor knob-stick send it to his friends beyond
Burnley; and I were to take him Jonas's kind regards, and he humbly
axed him to forgive him. So I did what Jonas wished. But bless your
life, none on us would ever throw vitriol again (at least at a
knob-stick) if they could see the sight I saw to-day. The man lay,
his face all wrapped in cloths, so I didn't see _that_; but not a
limb, nor a bit of a limb, could keep from quivering with pain. He
would ha' bitten his hand to keep down his moans, but couldn't, his
face hurt him so if he moved it e'er so little. He could scarce mind
me when I telled him about Jonas; he did squeeze my hand when I
jingled the money, but when I axed his wife's name he shrieked out,
'Mary, Mary, shall I never see you again? Mary, my darling, they've
made me blind because I wanted to work for you and our own baby; oh,
Mary, Mary!' Then the nurse came, and said he were raving, and that I
had made him worse. And I'm afeard it was true; yet I were loth to go
without knowing where to send the money. . . . So that kept me beyond
my time, chaps."

"Did yo hear where the wife lived at last?" asked many anxious
voices.

"No! he went on talking to her, till his words cut my heart like a
knife. I axed th' nurse to find out who she was, and where she lived.
But what I'm more especial naming it now for is this,--for one thing
I wanted yo all to know why I weren't at my post this morning; for
another, I wish to say, that I, for one, ha' seen enough of what
comes of attacking knob-sticks, and I'll ha nought to do with it no
more."

There were some expressions of disapprobation, but John did not mind
them.

"Nay! I'm no coward," he replied, "and I'm true to th' backbone. What
I would like, and what I would do, would be to fight the masters.
There's one among yo called me a coward. Well! every man has a right
to his opinion; but since I've thought on th' matter to-day, I've
thought we han all on us been more like cowards in attacking the poor
like ourselves; them as has none to help, but mun choose between
vitriol and starvation. I say we're more cowardly in doing that than
in leaving them alone. No! what I would do is this. Have at the
masters!" Again he shouted, "Have at the masters!" He spoke lower;
all listened with hushed breath.

"It's the masters as has wrought this woe; it's the masters as should
pay for it. Him as called me coward just now, may try if I am one or
not. Set me to serve out the masters, and see if there's ought I'll
stick at."

"It would give th' masters a bit on a fright if one on them were
beaten within an inch of his life," said one.

"Ay! or beaten till no life were left in him," growled another.

And so with words, or looks that told more than words, they built up
a deadly plan. Deeper and darker grew the import of their speeches,
as they stood hoarsely muttering their meaning out, and glaring, with
eyes that told the terror their own thoughts were to them, upon their
neighbours. Their clenched fists, their set teeth, their livid looks,
all told the suffering their minds were voluntarily undergoing in
the contemplation of crime, and in familiarising themselves with its
details.

Then came one of those fierce terrible oaths which bind members
of Trades' Unions to any given purpose. Then, under the flaring
gaslight, they met together to consult further. With the distrust
of guilt, each was suspicious of his neighbour; each dreaded the
treachery of another. A number of pieces of paper (the identical
letter on which the caricature had been drawn that very morning) were
torn up, and _one was marked_. Then all were folded up again, looking
exactly alike. They were shuffled together in a hat. The gas was
extinguished; each drew out a paper. The gas was re-lighted. Then
each went as far as he could from his fellows, and examined the paper
he had drawn without saying a word, and with a countenance as stony
and immovable as he could make it.

Then, still rigidly silent, they each took up their hats and went
every one his own way.

He who had drawn the marked paper had drawn the lot of the assassin!
and he had sworn to act according to his drawing! But no one save God
and his own conscience knew who was the appointed murderer!




CHAPTER XVII.

BARTON'S NIGHT-ERRAND.


   "Mournful is't to say Farewell,
     Though for few brief hours we part;
   In that absence, who can tell
     What may come to wring the heart!"

   ANONYMOUS.


The events recorded in the last chapter took place on a Tuesday. On
Thursday afternoon Mary was surprised, in the midst of some little
bustle in which she was engaged, by the entrance of Will Wilson.
He looked strange, at least it was strange to see any different
expression on his face to his usual joyous beaming appearance. He had
a paper parcel in his hand. He came in, and sat down, more quietly
than usual.

"Why, Will! what's the matter with you? You seem quite cut up about
something!"

"And I am, Mary! I'm come to say good-bye; and few folk like to say
good-bye to them they love."

"Good-bye! Bless me, Will, that's sudden, isn't it?"

Mary left off ironing, and came and stood near the fire-place. She
had always liked Will; but now it seemed as if a sudden spring of
sisterly love had gushed up in her heart, so sorry did she feel to
hear of his approaching departure.

"It's very sudden, isn't it?" said she, repeating her question.

"Yes! it's very sudden," said he, dreamily. "No, it isn't;" rousing
himself, to think of what he was saying. "The captain told me in a
fortnight he would be ready to sail again; but it comes very sudden
on me, I had got so fond of you all."

Mary understood the particular fondness that was thus generalised.
She spoke again.

"But it's not a fortnight since you came. Not a fortnight since you
knocked at Jane Wilson's door, and I was there, you remember. Nothing
like a fortnight!"

"No; I know it's not. But, you see, I got a letter this afternoon
from Jack Harris, to tell me our ship sails on Tuesday next; and it's
long since I promised my uncle (my mother's brother, him that lives
at Kirk-Christ, beyond Ramsay, in the Isle of Man) that I'd go and
see him and his, this time of coming ashore. I must go. I'm sorry
enough; but I mustn't slight poor mother's friends. I must go. Don't
try to keep me," said he, evidently fearing the strength of his own
resolution, if hard pressed by entreaty.

"I'm not a-going, Will. I dare say you're right; only I can't help
feeling sorry you're going away. It seems so flat to be left behind.
When do you go?"

"To-night. I shan't see you again."

"To-night! and you go to Liverpool! May be you and father will go
together. He's going to Glasgow, by way of Liverpool."

"No! I'm walking; and I don't think your father will be up to
walking."

"Well! and why on earth are you walking? You can get by railway for
three-and-sixpence."

"Ay, but Mary! (thou mustn't let out what I'm going to tell thee) I
haven't got three shillings, no, nor even a sixpence left, at least
not here; before I came here I gave my landlady enough to carry me to
the island and back, and may be a trifle for presents, and I brought
all the rest here; and it's all gone but this," jingling a few
coppers in his hand.

"Nay, never fret over my walking a matter of thirty mile," added he,
as he saw she looked grave and sorry. "It's a fine clear night, and
I shall set off betimes, and get in afore the Manx packet sails.
Where's your father going? To Glasgow, did you say? Perhaps he and
I may have a bit of a trip together then, for, if the Manx boat has
sailed when I get into Liverpool, I shall go by a Scotch packet.
What's he going to do in Glasgow?--Seek for work? Trade is as bad
there as here, folk say."

"No; he knows that," answered Mary, sadly. "I sometimes think he'll
never get work again, and that trade will never mend. It's very hard
to keep up one's heart. I wish I were a boy, I'd go to sea with you.
It would be getting away from bad news at any rate; and now, there's
hardly a creature that crosses the door-step, but has something
sad and unhappy to tell one. Father is going as a delegate from
his Union, to ask help from the Glasgow folk. He's starting this
evening."

Mary sighed, for the feeling again came over her that it was very
flat to be left alone.

"You say no one crosses the threshold but has something sad to say;
you don't mean that Margaret Jennings has any trouble?" asked the
young sailor, anxiously.

"No!" replied Mary, smiling a little, "she's the only one I know,
I believe, who seems free from care. Her blindness almost appears
a blessing sometimes; she was so downhearted when she dreaded it,
and now she seems so calm and happy when it's downright come. No!
Margaret's happy, I do think."

"I could almost wish it had been otherwise," said Will, thoughtfully.
"I could have been so glad to comfort her, and cherish her, if she
had been in trouble."

"And why can't you cherish her, even though she is happy?" asked
Mary.

"Oh! I don't know. She seems so much better than I am! And her voice!
When I hear it, and think of the wishes that are in my heart, it
seems as much out of place to ask her to be my wife, as it would be
to ask an angel from heaven."

Mary could not help laughing outright, in spite of her depression, at
the idea of Margaret as an angel; it was so difficult (even to her
dress-making imagination) to fancy where, and how, the wings would be
fastened to the brown stuff gown, or the blue and yellow print.

Will laughed, too, a little, out of sympathy with Mary's pretty merry
laugh. Then he said--

"Ay, you may laugh, Mary; it only shows you've never been in love."

In an instant Mary was carnation colour, and the tears sprang to her
soft gray eyes; she was suffering so much from the doubts arising
from love! It was unkind of him. He did not notice her change of
look and of complexion. He only noticed that she was silent, so he
continued:

"I thought--I think, that when I come back from this voyage, I will
speak. It's my fourth voyage in the same ship, and with the same
captain, and he's promised he'll make me second mate after this trip;
then I shall have something to offer Margaret; and her grandfather,
and aunt Alice, shall live with her, to keep her from being lonesome
while I'm at sea. I'm speaking as if she cared for me, and would
marry me; d'ye think she does care at all for me, Mary?" asked he,
anxiously.

Mary had a very decided opinion of her own on the subject, but she
did not feel as if she had any right to give it. So she said--

"You must ask Margaret, not me, Will; she's never named your name to
me." His countenance fell. "But I should say that was a good sign
from a girl like her. I've no right to say what I think; but, if I
was you, I would not leave her now without speaking."

"No! I cannot speak! I have tried. I've been in to wish them
good-bye, and my voice stuck in my throat. I could say nought of what
I'd planned to say; and I never thought of being so bold as to offer
her marriage till I'd been my next trip, and been made mate. I could
not even offer her this box," said he, undoing his paper parcel and
displaying a gaudily ornamented accordion; "I longed to buy her
something, and I thought, if it were something in the music line, she
would may-be fancy it more. So, will you give it to her, Mary, when
I'm gone? and, if you can slip in something tender,--something, you
know, of what I feel,--may-be she would listen to you, Mary."

Mary promised that she would do all that he asked.

"I shall be thinking on her many and many a night, when I'm keeping
my watch in mid-sea; I wonder if she will ever think on me when the
wind is whistling, and the gale rising. You'll often speak of me to
her, Mary? And if I should meet with any mischance, tell her how
dear, how very dear, she was to me, and bid her, for the sake of one
who loved her well, try and comfort my poor aunt Alice. Dear old
aunt! you and Margaret will often go and see her, won't you? She's
sadly failed since I was last ashore. And so good as she has been!
When I lived with her, a little wee chap, I used to be wakened by the
neighbours knocking her up; this one was ill, or that body's child
was restless; and, for as tired as ever she might be, she would be
up and dressed in a twinkling, never thinking of the hard day's wash
afore her next morning. Them were happy times! How pleased I used to
be when she would take me into the fields with her to gather herbs!
I've tasted tea in China since then, but it wasn't half so good as
the herb tea she used to make for me o' Sunday nights. And she knew
such a deal about plants and birds, and their ways! She used to tell
me long stories about her childhood, and we used to plan how we would
go sometime, please God (that was always her word), and live near her
old home beyond Lancaster; in the very cottage where she was born if
we could get it. Dear! and how different it is! Here is she still in
a back street o' Manchester, never likely to see her own home again;
and I, a sailor, off for America next week. I wish she had been able
to go to Burton once afore she died."

"She would may be have found all sadly changed," said Mary, though
her heart echoed Will's feeling.

"Ay! ay! I dare say it's best. One thing I do wish though, and I have
often wished it when out alone on the deep sea, when even the most
thoughtless can't choose but think on th' past and th' future; and
that is, that I'd never grieved her. Oh Mary! many a hasty word comes
sorely back on the heart, when one thinks one shall never see the
person whom one has grieved again!"

They both stood thinking. Suddenly Mary started.

"That's father's step. And his shirt's not ready!"

She hurried to her irons, and tried to make up for lost time.

John Barton came in. Such a haggard and wildly anxious looking man,
Will thought he had never seen. He looked at Will, but spoke no word
of greeting or welcome.

"I'm come to bid you good bye," said the sailor, and would in his
sociable friendly humour have gone on speaking. But John answered
abruptly,

"Good bye to ye, then."

There was that in his manner which left no doubt of his desire to get
rid of the visitor, and Will accordingly shook hands with Mary, and
looked at John, as if doubting how far to offer to shake hands with
him. But he met with no answering glance or gesture, so he went his
way, stopping for an instant at the door to say,

"You'll think on me on Tuesday, Mary. That's the day we shall hoist
our blue Peter, Jack Harris says."

Mary was heartily sorry when the door closed; it seemed like shutting
out a friendly sunbeam. And her father! what could be the matter with
him? He was so restless; not speaking (she wished he would), but
starting up and then sitting down, and meddling with her irons; he
seemed so fierce, too, to judge from his face. She wondered if he
disliked Will being there; or if he were vexed to find that she had
not got further on with her work. At last she could bear his nervous
way no longer, it made her equally nervous and fidgetty. She would
speak.

"When are you going, father? I don't know the time o' the trains."

"And why shouldst thou know?" replied he, gruffly. "Meddle with thy
ironing, but donnot be asking questions about what doesn't concern
thee."

"I wanted to get you something to eat first," answered she, gently.

"Thou dost not know that I'm larning to do without food," said he.

Mary looked at him to see if he spoke jestingly. No! he looked
savagely grave.

She finished her bit of ironing, and began preparing the food she
was sure her father needed; for by this time her experience in the
degrees of hunger had taught her that his present irritability was
increased, if not caused, by want of food.

He had had a sovereign given him to pay his expenses as delegate to
Glasgow, and out of this he had given Mary a few shillings in the
morning; so she had been able to buy a sufficient meal, and now her
care was to cook it so as most to tempt him.

"If thou'rt doing that for me, Mary, thou may'st spare thy labour. I
telled thee I were not for eating."

"Just a little bit, father, before starting," coaxed Mary,
perseveringly.

At that instant, who should come in but Job Legh. It was not often he
came, but when he did pay visits, Mary knew from past experience they
were any thing but short. Her father's countenance fell back into
the deep gloom from which it was but just emerging at the sound of
Mary's sweet voice, and pretty pleading. He became again restless and
fidgetty, scarcely giving Job Legh the greeting necessary for a host
in his own house. Job, however, did not stand upon ceremony. He had
come to pay a visit, and was not to be daunted from his purpose. He
was interested in John Barton's mission to Glasgow, and wanted to
hear all about it; so he sat down, and made himself comfortable, in a
manner that Mary saw was meant to be stationary.

"So thou'rt off to Glasgow, art thou?" he began his catechism.

"Ay."

"When art starting?"

"To-night."

"That I knowed. But by what train?"

That was just what Mary wanted to know; but what apparently her
father was in no mood to tell. He got up without speaking, and
went up-stairs. Mary knew from his step, and his way, how much he
was put out, and feared Job would see it, too. But no! Job seemed
imperturbable. So much the better, and perhaps she could cover her
father's rudeness by her own civility to so kind a friend.

So half listening to her father's movements up-stairs, (passionate,
violent, restless motions they were) and half attending to Job Legh,
she tried to pay him all due regard.

"When does thy father start, Mary?"

That plaguing question again.

"Oh! very soon. I'm just getting him a bit of supper. Is Margaret
very well?"

"Yes, she's well enough. She's meaning to go and keep Alice Wilson
company for an hour or so this evening; as soon as she thinks her
nephew will have started for Liverpool; for she fancies the old woman
will feel a bit lonesome. Th' Union is paying for your father, I
suppose?"

"Yes, they've given him a sovereign. You're one of th' Union, Job?"

"Ay! I'm one, sure enough; but I'm but a sleeping partner in the
concern. I were obliged to become a member for peace, else I don't go
along with 'em. Yo see they think themselves wise, and me silly, for
differing with them; well! there's no harm in that. But then they
won't let me be silly in peace and quietness, but will force me to
be as wise as they are; now that's not British liberty, I say. I'm
forced to be wise according to their notions, else they parsecute me,
and sarve me out."

What could her father be doing up-stairs? Tramping and banging about.
Why did he not come down? Or why did not Job go? The supper would be
spoilt.

But Job had no notion of going.

"You see my folly is this, Mary. I would take what I could get; I
think half a loaf is better than no bread. I would work for low wages
rather than sit idle and starve. But, comes the Trades' Union, and
says, 'Well, if you take the half-loaf, we'll worry you out of your
life. Will you be clemmed, or will you be worried?' Now clemming is a
quiet death, and worrying isn't, so I choose clemming, and come into
th' Union. But I wish they'd leave me free, if I am a fool."

Creak, creak, went the stairs. Her father was coming down at last.

Yes, he came down, but more doggedly fierce than before, and made up
for his journey, too; with his little bundle on his arm. He went up
to Job, and, more civilly than Mary expected, wished him good-bye. He
then turned to her, and in a short cold manner, bade her farewell.

"Oh! father, don't go yet. Your supper is all ready. Stay one
moment!"

But he pushed her away, and was gone. She followed him to the door,
her eyes blinded by sudden tears; she stood there looking after him.
He was so strange, so cold, so hard. Suddenly, at the end of the
court, he turned, and saw her standing there; he came back quickly,
and took her in his arms.

"God bless thee, Mary!--God in heaven bless thee, poor child!" She
threw her arms round his neck.

"Don't go yet, father; I can't bear you to go yet. Come in, and eat
some supper; you look so ghastly; dear father, do!"

"No," he said, faintly and mournfully. "It's best as it is. I
couldn't eat, and it's best to be off. I cannot be still at home.
I must be moving."

So saying, he unlaced her soft twining arms, and kissing her once
more, set off on his fierce errand.

And he was out of sight! She did not know why, but she had never
before felt so depressed, so desolate. She turned in to Job, who sat
there still. Her father, as soon as he was out of sight, slackened
his pace, and fell into that heavy listless step, which told as well
as words could do, of hopelessness and weakness. It was getting dark,
but he loitered on, returning no greeting to any one.

A child's cry caught his ear. His thoughts were running on little
Tom; on the dead and buried child of happier years. He followed the
sound of the wail, that might have been _his_, and found a poor
little mortal, who had lost his way, and whose grief had choked up
his thoughts to the single want, "Mammy, mammy." With tender address,
John Barton soothed the little laddie, and with beautiful patience he
gathered fragments of meaning from the half spoken words which came
mingled with sobs from the terrified little heart. So, aided by
inquiries here and there from a passer-by, he led and carried the
little fellow home, where his mother had been too busy to miss him,
but now received him with thankfulness, and with an eloquent Irish
blessing. When John heard the words of blessing, he shook his head
mournfully, and turned away to retrace his steps.

Let us leave him.

Mary took her sewing after he had gone, and sat on, and sat on,
trying to listen to Job, who was more inclined to talk than usual.
She had conquered her feeling of impatience towards him so far as to
be able to offer him her father's rejected supper; and she even tried
to eat herself. But her heart failed her. A leaden weight seemed to
hang over her; a sort of presentiment of evil, or perhaps only an
excess of low-spirited feeling in consequence of the two departures
which had taken place that afternoon.

She wondered how long Job Legh would sit. She did not like putting
down her work, and crying before him, and yet she had never in her
life longed so much to be alone in order to indulge in a good hearty
burst of tears.

"Well, Mary," she suddenly caught him saying, "I thought you'd be
a bit lonely to-night; and as Margaret were going to cheer th' old
woman, I said I'd go and keep th' young un company; and a very
pleasant, chatty evening we've had; very. Only I wonder as Margaret
is not come back."

"But perhaps she is," suggested Mary.

"No, no, I took care o' that. Look ye here!" and he pulled out the
great house-key. "She'll have to stand waiting i' th' street, and
that I'm sure she wouldn't do, when she knew where to find me."

"Will she come back by hersel?" asked Mary.

"Ay. At first I were afraid o' trusting her, and I used to follow her
a bit behind; never letting on, of course. But, bless you! she goes
along as steadily as can be; rather slow, to be sure, and her head a
bit on one side as if she were listening. And it's real beautiful to
see her cross the road. She'll wait above a bit to hear that all is
still; not that she's so dark as not to see a coach or a cart like
a big black thing, but she can't rightly judge how far off it is by
sight, so she listens. Hark! that's her!"

Yes; in she came with her usually calm face all tear-stained and
sorrow-marked.

"What's the matter, my wench?" said Job, hastily.

"Oh! grandfather! Alice Wilson's so bad!" She could say no more, for
her breathless agitation. The afternoon, and the parting with Will,
had weakened her nerves for any after-shock.

"What is it? Do tell us, Margaret!" said Mary, placing her in a
chair, and loosening her bonnet-strings.

"I think it's a stroke o' the palsy. Any rate she has lost the use of
one side."

"Was it afore Will had set off?" asked Mary.

"No; he were gone before I got there," said Margaret; "and she were
much about as well as she has been this many a day. She spoke a bit,
but not much; but that were only natural, for Mrs. Wilson likes to
have the talk to hersel, you know. She got up to go across the room,
and then I heard a drag wi' her leg, and presently a fall, and Mrs.
Wilson came running, and set up such a cry! I stopped wi' Alice,
while she fetched a doctor; but she could not speak, to answer me,
though she tried, I think."

"Where was Jem? Why didn't he go for the doctor?"

"He were out when I got there, and he never came home while I
stopped."

"Thou'st never left Mrs. Wilson alone wi' poor Alice?" asked Job,
hastily.

"No, no," said Margaret. "But, oh! grandfather; it's now I feel how
hard it is to have lost my sight. I should have so loved to nurse
her; and I did try, until I found I did more harm than good. Oh!
grandfather; if I could but see!"

She sobbed a little; and they let her give that ease to her heart.
Then she went on--

"No! I went round by Mrs. Davenport's, and she were hard at work;
but, the minute I told my errand, she were ready and willing to go to
Jane Wilson, and stop up all night with Alice."

"And what does the doctor say?" asked Mary.

"Oh! much what all doctors say: he puts a fence on this side, and a
fence on that, for fear he should be caught tripping in his judgment.
One moment he does not think there's much hope--but while there
is life there is hope; th' next he says he should think she might
recover partial, but her age is again her. He's ordered her leeches
to her head."

Margaret, having told her tale, leant back with weariness, both of
body and mind. Mary hastened to make her a cup of tea; while Job,
lately so talkative, sat quiet and mournfully silent.

"I'll go first thing to-morrow morning, and learn how she is; and
I'll bring word back before I go to work," said Mary.

"It's a bad job Will's gone," said Job.

"Jane does not think she knows any one," replied Margaret. "It's
perhaps as well he shouldn't see her now, for they say her face is
sadly drawn. He'll remember her with her own face better, if he does
not see her again."

With a few more sorrowful remarks they separated for the night, and
Mary was left alone in her house, to meditate on the heavy day that
had passed over her head. Everything seemed going wrong. Will gone;
her father gone--and so strangely too! And to a place so mysteriously
distant as Glasgow seemed to be to her! She had felt his presence
as a protection against Harry Carson and his threats; and now she
dreaded lest he should learn she was alone. Her heart began to
despair, too, about Jem. She feared he had ceased to love her; and
she--she only loved him more and more for his seeming neglect. And,
as if all this aggregate of sorrowful thoughts was not enough, here
was this new woe, of poor Alice's paralytic stroke.




CHAPTER XVIII.

MURDER.


   "But in his pulse there was no throb,
   Nor on his lips one dying sob;
   Sigh, nor word, nor struggling breath
   Heralded his way to death."

   SIEGE OF CORINTH.

   "My brain runs this way and that way; 'twill not fix
   On aught but vengeance."

   DUKE OF GUISE.


I must now go back to an hour or two before Mary and her friends
parted for the night. It might be about eight o'clock that
evening, and the three Miss Carsons were sitting in their father's
drawing-room. He was asleep in the dining-room, in his own
comfortable chair. Mrs. Carson was (as was usual with her, when
no particular excitement was going on) very poorly, and sitting
up-stairs in her dressing-room, indulging in the luxury of a
head-ache. She was not well, certainly. "Wind in the head," the
servants called it. But it was but the natural consequence of the
state of mental and bodily idleness in which she was placed. Without
education enough to value the resources of wealth and leisure, she
was so circumstanced as to command both. It would have done her more
good than all the æther and sal-volatile she was daily in the habit
of swallowing, if she might have taken the work of one of her own
housemaids for a week; made beds, rubbed tables, shaken carpets, and
gone out into the fresh morning air, without all the paraphernalia
of shawl, cloak, boa, fur boots, bonnet, and veil, in which she was
equipped before setting out for an "airing," in the closely shut-up
carriage.

So the three girls were by themselves in the comfortable, elegant,
well-lighted drawing-room; and, like many similarly-situated young
ladies, they did not exactly know what to do to while away the time
until the tea-hour. The elder two had been at a dancing-party the
night before, and were listless and sleepy in consequence. One tried
to read "Emerson's Essays," and fell asleep in the attempt; the other
was turning over a parcel of new music, in order to select what she
liked. Amy, the youngest, was copying some manuscript music. The air
was heavy with the fragrance of strongly-scented flowers, which sent
out their night odours from an adjoining conservatory.

The clock on the chimney-piece chimed eight. Sophy (the sleeping
sister) started up at the sound.

"What o'clock is that?" she asked.

"Eight," said Amy.

"Oh dear! how tired I am! Is Harry come in? Tea would rouse one up a
little. Are not you worn out, Helen?"

"Yes; I am tired enough. One is good for nothing the day after a
dance. Yet I don't feel weary at the time; I suppose it is the
lateness of the hours."

"And yet, how could it be managed otherwise? So many don't dine till
five or six, that one cannot begin before eight or nine; and then it
takes a long time to get into the spirit of the evening. It is always
more pleasant after supper than before."

"Well, I'm too tired to-night to reform the world in the matter of
dances or balls. What are you copying, Amy?"

"Only that little Spanish air you sing--'Quien quiera.'"

"What are you copying it for?" asked Helen.

"Harry asked me to do it for him this morning at breakfast-time,--for
Miss Richardson, he said."

"For Jane Richardson!" said Sophy, as if a new idea were receiving
strength in her mind.

"Do you think Harry means any thing by his attention to her?" asked
Helen.

"Nay, I do not know any thing more than you do; I can only observe
and conjecture. What do you think, Helen?"

"Harry always likes to be of consequence to the belle of the room.
If one girl is more admired than another, he likes to flutter about
her, and seem to be on intimate terms with her. That is his way,
and I have not noticed any thing beyond that in his manner to Jane
Richardson."

"But I don't think she knows it's only his way. Just watch her the
next time we meet her when Harry is there, and see how she crimsons,
and looks another way when she feels he is coming up to her. I think
he sees it, too, and I think he is pleased with it."

"I dare say Harry would like well enough to turn the head of such a
lovely girl as Jane Richardson. But I'm not convinced that he is in
love, whatever she may be."

"Well, then!" said Sophy, indignantly, "though it is our own brother,
I do think he is behaving very wrongly. The more I think of it the
more sure I am that she thinks he means something, and that he
intends her to think so. And then, when he leaves off paying her
attention--"

"Which will be as soon as a prettier girl makes her appearance,"
interrupted Helen.

"As soon as he leaves off paying her attention," resumed Sophy,
"she will have many and many a heart-ache, and then she will harden
herself into being a flirt, a feminine flirt, as he is a masculine
flirt. Poor girl!"

"I don't like to hear you speak so of Harry," said Amy, looking up at
Sophy.

"And I don't like to have to speak so, Amy, for I love him dearly.
He is a good, kind brother, but I do think him vain, and I think he
hardly knows the misery, the crimes, to which indulged vanity may
lead him."

Helen yawned.

"Oh! do you think we may ring for tea? Sleeping after dinner always
makes me so feverish."

"Yes, surely. Why should not we?" said the more energetic Sophy,
pulling the bell with some determination.

"Tea directly, Parker," said she, authoritatively, as the man entered
the room.

She was too little in the habit of reading expressions on the faces
of others to notice Parker's countenance.

Yet it was striking. It was blanched to a dead whiteness; the lips
compressed as if to keep within some tale of horror; the eyes
distended and unnatural. It was a terror-stricken face.

The girls began to put away their music and books, in preparation for
tea. The door slowly opened again, and this time it was the nurse who
entered. I call her nurse, for such had been her office in by-gone
days, though now she held rather an anomalous situation in the
family. Seamstress, attendant on the young ladies, keeper of the
stores; only "Nurse" was still her name. She had lived longer with
them than any other servant, and to her their manner was far less
haughty than to the other domestics. She occasionally came into the
drawing-room to look for things belonging to their father or mother,
so it did not excite any surprise when she advanced into the room.
They went on arranging their various articles of employment.

She wanted them to look up. She wanted them to read something in her
face--her face so full of woe, of horror. But they went on without
taking any notice. She coughed; not a natural cough; but one of those
coughs which ask so plainly for remark.

"Dear nurse, what is the matter?" asked Amy. "Are not you well?"

"Is mamma ill?" asked Sophy, quickly.

"Speak, speak, nurse!" said they all, as they saw her efforts to
articulate, choked by the convulsive rising in her throat. They
clustered round her with eager faces, catching a glimpse of some
terrible truth to be revealed.

"My dear young ladies! my dear girls," she gasped out at length, and
then she burst into tears.

"Oh! do tell us what it is, nurse," said one. "Any thing is better
than this. Speak!"

"My children! I don't know how to break it to you. My dears, poor Mr.
Harry is brought home--"

"Brought home--_brought_ home--how?" Instinctively they sank their
voices to a whisper; but a fearful whisper it was. In the same low
tone, as if afraid lest the walls, the furniture, the inanimate
things which told of preparation for life and comfort, should hear,
she answered,

"Dead!"

Amy clutched her nurse's arm, and fixed her eyes on her as if to know
if such a tale could be true; and when she read its confirmation in
those sad, mournful, unflinching eyes, she sank, without word or
sound, down in a faint upon the floor. One sister sat down on an
ottoman, and covered her face, to try and realise it. That was Sophy.
Helen threw herself on the sofa, and burying her head in the pillows,
tried to stifle the screams and moans which shook her frame.

The nurse stood silent. She had not told _all_.

"Tell me," said Sophy, looking up, and speaking in a hoarse voice,
which told of the inward pain, "tell me, nurse! Is he _dead_, did you
say? Have you sent for a doctor? Oh! send for one, send for one,"
continued she, her voice rising to shrillness, and starting to her
feet. Helen lifted herself up, and looked, with breathless waiting,
towards nurse.

"My dears, he is dead! But I have sent for a doctor. I have done all
I could."

"When did he--when did they bring him home?" asked Sophy.

"Perhaps ten minutes ago. Before you rang for Parker."

"How did he die? Where did they find him? He looked so well. He
always seemed so strong. Oh! are you sure he is dead?"

She went towards the door. Nurse laid her hand on her arm.

"Miss Sophy, I have not told you all. Can you bear to hear it?
Remember, master is in the next room, and he knows nothing yet. Come,
you must help me to tell him. Now be quiet, dear! It was no common
death he died!" She looked in her face as if trying to convey her
meaning by her eyes.

Sophy's lips moved, but nurse could hear no sound.

"He has been shot as he was coming home along Turner Street,
to-night."

Sophy went on with the motion of her lips, twitching them almost
convulsively.

"My dear, you must rouse yourself, and remember your father and
mother have yet to be told. Speak! Miss Sophy!"

But she could not; her whole face worked involuntarily. The nurse
left the room, and almost immediately brought back some sal-volatile
and water. Sophy drank it eagerly, and gave one or two deep gasps.
Then she spoke in a calm unnatural voice.

"What do you want me to do, nurse? Go to Helen and poor Amy. See,
they want help."

"Poor creatures! we must let them alone for a bit. You must go to
master; that's what I want you to do, Miss Sophy. You must break it
to him, poor old gentleman. Come, he's asleep in the dining-room, and
the men are waiting to speak to him."

Sophy went mechanically to the dining-room door.

"Oh! I cannot go in. I cannot tell him. What must I say?"

"I'll come with you, Miss Sophy. Break it to him by degrees."

"I can't, nurse. My head throbs so, I shall be sure to say the wrong
thing."

However, she opened the door. There sat her father, the shaded light
of the candle-lamp falling upon, and softening his marked features,
while his snowy hair contrasted well with the deep crimson morocco
of the chair. The newspaper he had been reading had dropped on the
carpet by his side. He breathed regularly and deeply.

At that instant the words of Mrs. Hemans's song came full into
Sophy's mind.

   "Ye know not what ye do,
     That call the slumberer back
   From the realms unseen by you,
     To life's dim, weary track."

But this life's track would be to the bereaved father something more
than dim and weary, hereafter.

"Papa," said she, softly. He did not stir.

"Papa!" she exclaimed, somewhat louder.

He started up, half awake.

"Tea is ready, is it?" and he yawned.

"No! papa, but something very dreadful--very sad, has happened!"

He was gaping so loud that he did not catch the words she uttered,
and did not see the expression of her face.

"Master Henry is not come back," said nurse. Her voice, heard in
unusual speech to him, arrested his attention, and rubbing his eyes,
he looked at the servant.

"Harry! oh no! he had to attend a meeting of the masters about these
cursed turn-outs. I don't expect him yet. What are you looking at me
so strangely for, Sophy?"

"Oh, papa, Harry is come back," said she, bursting into tears.

"What do you mean?" said he, startled into an impatient consciousness
that something was wrong. "One of you says he is not come home, and
the other says he is. Now that's nonsense! Tell me at once what's the
matter. Did he go on horseback to town? Is he thrown? Speak, child,
can't you?"

"No! he's not been thrown, papa," said Sophy, sadly.

"But he's badly hurt," put in the nurse, desirous to be drawing his
anxiety to a point.

"Hurt? Where? How? Have you sent for a doctor?" said he, hastily
rising, as if to leave the room.

"Yes, papa, we've sent for a doctor--but I'm afraid--I believe it's
of no use."

He looked at her for a moment, and in her face he read the truth. His
son, his only son, was dead.

He sank back in his chair, and hid his face in his hands, and bowed
his head upon the table. The strong mahogany dining-table shook and
rattled under his agony.

Sophy went and put her arms round his bowed neck.

"Go! you are not Harry," said he; but the action roused him.

"Where is he? where is the--" said he, with his strong face set into
the lines of anguish, by two minutes of such intense woe.

"In the servants' hall," said nurse. "Two policemen and another man
brought him home. They would be glad to speak to you when you are
able, sir."

"I am able now," replied he. At first when he stood up, he tottered.
But steadying himself, he walked, as firmly as a soldier on drill,
to the door. Then he turned back and poured out a glass of wine from
the decanter which yet remained on the table. His eye caught the
wine-glass which Harry had used but two or three hours before. He
sighed a long quivering sigh. And then mastering himself again, he
left the room.

"You had better go back to your sisters, Miss Sophy," said nurse.

Miss Carson went. She could not face death yet.

The nurse followed Mr. Carson to the servants' hall. There, on their
dinner-table, lay the poor dead body. The men who had brought it were
sitting near the fire, while several of the servants stood round the
table, gazing at the remains.

_The remains!_

One or two were crying; one or two were whispering; awed into a
strange stillness of voice and action by the presence of the dead.
When Mr. Carson came in they all drew back and looked at him with the
reverence due to sorrow.

He went forward and gazed long and fondly on the calm, dead face;
then he bent down and kissed the lips yet crimson with life. The
policemen had advanced and stood ready to be questioned. But at first
the old man's mind could only take in the idea of death; slowly,
slowly came the conception of violence, of murder. "How did he die?"
he groaned forth.

The policemen looked at each other. Then one began, and stated that
having heard the report of a gun in Turner Street, he had turned down
that way (a lonely, unfrequented way Mr. Carson knew, but a short
cut to his garden-door, of which Harry had a key); that as he (the
policeman) came nearer, he had heard footsteps as of a man running
away; but the evening was so dark (the moon not having yet risen)
that he could see no one twenty yards off. That he had even been
startled when close to the body by seeing it lying across the path at
his feet. That he had sprung his rattle; and when another policeman
came up, by the light of the lantern they had discovered who it was
that had been killed. That they believed him to be dead when they
first took him up, as he had never moved, spoken, or breathed. That
intelligence of the murder had been sent to the superintendent, who
would probably soon be here. That two or three policemen were still
about the place where the murder was committed, seeking out for some
trace of the murderer. Having said this, they stopped speaking.

Mr. Carson had listened attentively, never taking his eyes off the
dead body. When they had ended, he said,

"Where was he shot?"

They lifted up some of the thick chestnut curls, and showed a blue
spot (you could hardly call it a hole, the flesh had closed so much
over it) in the left temple. A deadly aim! And yet it was so dark a
night!

"He must have been close upon him," said one policeman.

"And have had him between him and the sky," added the other.

There was a little commotion at the door of the room, and there stood
poor Mrs. Carson, the mother.

She had heard unusual noises in the house, and had sent down her maid
(much more a companion to her than her highly-educated daughters) to
discover what was going on. But the maid either forgot, or dreaded,
to return; and with nervous impatience Mrs. Carson came down herself,
and had traced the hum and buzz of voices to the servants' hall.

Mr. Carson turned round. But he could not leave the dead for any one
living.

"Take her away, nurse. It is no sight for her. Tell Miss Sophy to go
to her mother." His eyes were again fixed on the dead face of his
son.

Presently Mrs. Carson's hysterical cries were heard all over the
house. Her husband shuddered at the outward expression of the agony
which was rending his heart.

Then the police superintendent came, and after him the doctor. The
latter went through all the forms of ascertaining death, without
uttering a word, and when at the conclusion of the operation of
opening a vein, from which no blood flowed, he shook his head, all
present understood the confirmation of their previous belief. The
superintendent asked to speak to Mr. Carson in private.

"It was just what I was going to request of you," answered he; so he
led the way into the dining-room, with the wine-glass still on the
table.

The door was carefully shut, and both sat down, each apparently
waiting for the other to begin.

At last Mr. Carson spoke.

"You probably have heard that I am a rich man."

The superintendent bowed in assent.

"Well, sir, half--nay, if necessary, the whole of my fortune I will
give to have the murderer brought to the gallows."

"Every exertion, you may be sure, sir, shall be used on our part; but
probably offering a handsome reward might accelerate the discovery
of the murderer. But what I wanted particularly to tell you, sir, is
that one of my men has already got some clue, and that another (who
accompanied me here) has within this quarter of an hour found a gun
in the field which the murderer crossed, and which he probably threw
away when pursued, as encumbering his flight. I have not the smallest
doubt of discovering the murderer."

"What do you call a handsome reward?" said Mr. Carson.

"Well, sir, three, or five hundred pounds is a munificent reward:
more than will probably be required as a temptation to any
accomplice."

"Make it a thousand," said Mr. Carson, decisively. "It's the doing of
those damned turn-outs."

"I imagine not," said the superintendent. "Some days ago the man I
was naming to you before, reported to the inspector when he came on
his beat, that he had had to separate your son from a young man, who
by his dress he believed to be employed in a foundry; that the man
had thrown Mr. Carson down, and seemed inclined to proceed to more
violence, when the policeman came up and interfered. Indeed, my man
wished to give him in charge for an assault, but Mr. Carson would not
allow that to be done."

"Just like him!--noble fellow!" murmured the father.

"But after your son had left, the man made use of some pretty strong
threats. And it's rather a curious coincidence that this scuffle took
place in the very same spot where the murder was committed; in Turner
Street."

There was some one knocking at the door of the room. It was Sophy,
who beckoned her father out, and then asked him, in an awe-struck
whisper, to come up-stairs and speak to her mother.

"She will not leave Harry, and talks so strangely.
Indeed--indeed--papa, I think she has lost her senses."

And the poor girl sobbed bitterly.

"Where is she?" asked Mr. Carson.

"In his room."

They went up stairs rapidly and silently. It was a large, comfortable
bedroom; too large to be well lighted by the flaring, flickering
kitchen-candle which had been hastily snatched up, and now stood on
the dressing-table.

On the bed, surrounded by its heavy, pall-like green curtains, lay
the dead son. They had carried him up, and laid him down, as tenderly
as though they feared to waken him; and, indeed, it looked more like
sleep than death, so very calm and full of repose was the face. You
saw, too, the chiselled beauty of the features much more perfectly
than when the brilliant colouring of life had distracted your
attention. There was a peace about him which told that death had come
too instantaneously to give any previous pain.

In a chair, at the head of the bed, sat the mother,--smiling. She
held one of the hands (rapidly stiffening, even in her warm grasp),
and gently stroked the back of it, with the endearing caress she had
used to all her children when young.

"I am glad you are come," said she, looking up at her husband, and
still smiling. "Harry is so full of fun, he always has something new
to amuse us with; and now he pretends he is asleep, and that we can't
waken him. Look! he is smiling now; he hears I have found him out.
Look!"

And, in truth, the lips, in the rest of death, did look as though
they wore a smile, and the waving light of the unsnuffed candle
almost made them seem to move.

"Look, Amy," said she to her youngest child, who knelt at her feet,
trying to soothe her, by kissing her garments.

"Oh, he was always a rogue! You remember, don't you, love? how full
of play he was as a baby; hiding his face under my arm, when you
wanted to play with him. Always a rogue, Harry!"

"We must get her away, sir," said nurse; "you know there is much to
be done before--"

"I understand, nurse," said the father, hastily interrupting her
in dread of the distinct words which would tell of the changes of
mortality.

"Come, love," said he to his wife. "I want you to come with me. I
want to speak to you down-stairs."

"I'm coming," said she, rising; "perhaps, after all, nurse, he's
really tired, and would be glad to sleep. Don't let him get cold,
though,--he feels rather chilly," continued she, after she had bent
down, and kissed the pale lips.

Her husband put his arm round her waist, and they left the room.
Then the three sisters burst into unrestrained wailings. They were
startled into the reality of life and death. And yet, in the midst of
shrieks and moans, of shivering, and chattering of teeth, Sophy's eye
caught the calm beauty of the dead; so calm amidst such violence, and
she hushed her emotion.

"Come," said she to her sisters, "nurse wants us to go; and besides,
we ought to be with mamma. Papa told the man he was talking to, when
I went for him, to wait, and she must not be left."

Meanwhile, the superintendent had taken a candle, and was examining
the engravings that hung round the dining-room. It was so common to
him to be acquainted with crime, that he was far from feeling all his
interest absorbed in the present case of violence, although he could
not help having much anxiety to detect the murderer. He was busy
looking at the only oil-painting in the room (a youth of eighteen
or so, in a fancy dress), and conjecturing its identity with the
young man so mysteriously dead, when the door opened, and Mr. Carson
returned. Stern as he had looked before leaving the room, he looked
far sterner now. His face was hardened into deep-purposed wrath.

"I beg your pardon, sir, for leaving you." The superintendent bowed.
They sat down, and spoke long together. One by one the policemen were
called in, and questioned.

All through the night there was bustle and commotion in the house.
Nobody thought of going to bed. It seemed strange to Sophy to hear
nurse summoned from her mother's side to supper, in the middle of the
night, and still stranger that she could go. The necessity of eating
and drinking seemed out of place in the house of death.

When night was passing into morning, the dining-room door opened, and
two persons' steps were heard along the hall. The superintendent was
leaving at last. Mr. Carson stood on the front door-step, feeling the
refreshment of the cooler morning air, and seeing the starlight fade
away into dawn.

"You will not forget," said he. "I trust to you."

The policeman bowed.

"Spare no money. The only purpose for which I now value wealth is
to have the murderer arrested, and brought to justice. My hope in
life now is to see him sentenced to death. Offer any rewards. Name
a thousand pounds in the placards. Come to me at any hour, night or
day, if that be required. All I ask of you is, to get the murderer
hanged. Next week, if possible--to-day is Friday. Surely, with the
clues you already possess, you can muster up evidence sufficient to
have him tried next week."

"He may easily request an adjournment of his trial, on the ground of
the shortness of the notice," said the superintendent.

"Oppose it, if possible. I will see that the first lawyers are
employed. I shall know no rest while he lives."

"Every thing shall be done, sir."

"You will arrange with the coroner. Ten o'clock, if convenient."

The superintendent took leave.

Mr. Carson stood on the step, dreading to shut out the light and air,
and return into the haunted, gloomy house.

"My son! my son!" he said, at last. "But you shall be avenged, my
poor murdered boy."

Ay! to avenge his wrongs the murderer had singled out his victim,
and with one fell action had taken away the life that God had
given. To avenge his child's death, the old man lived on; with the
single purpose in his heart of vengeance on the murderer. True, his
vengeance was sanctioned by law, but was it the less revenge?

Are we worshippers of Christ? or of Alecto?

Oh! Orestes! you would have made a very tolerable Christian of the
nineteenth century!




CHAPTER XIX.

JEM WILSON ARRESTED ON SUSPICION.


   "Deeds to be hid which were not hid,
   Which, all confused, I could not know,
   Whether I suffered or I did,
   For all seemed guilt, remorse, or woe."

   COLERIDGE.


I left Mary, on that same Thursday night which left its burden of
woe at Mr. Carson's threshold, haunted with depressing thoughts. All
through the night she tossed restlessly about, trying to get quit of
the ideas that harassed her, and longing for the light when she could
rise, and find some employment. But just as dawn began to appear, she
became more quiet, and fell into a sound heavy sleep, which lasted
till she was sure it was late in the morning by the full light that
shone in.

She dressed hastily, and heard the neighbouring church-clock strike
eight. It was far too late to do as she had planned (after inquiring
how Alice was, to return and tell Margaret), and she accordingly went
in to inform the latter of her change of purpose, and the cause of
it; but on entering the house she found Job sitting alone, looking
sad enough. She told him what she came for.

"Margaret, wench! why she's been gone to Wilson's these two hours.
Ay! sure, you did say last night you would go; but she could na rest
in her bed, so was off betimes this morning."

Mary could do nothing but feel guilty of her long morning nap, and
hasten to follow Margaret's steps; for late as it was, she felt she
could not settle well to her work, unless she learnt how kind good
Alice Wilson was going on.

So, eating her crust-of-bread breakfast, she passed rapidly along the
streets. She remembered afterwards the little groups of people she
had seen, eagerly hearing, and imparting news; but at the time her
only care was to hasten on her way, in dread of a reprimand from Miss
Simmonds.

She went into the house at Jane Wilson's, her heart at the instant
giving a strange knock, and sending the rosy flush into her face,
at the thought that Jem might possibly be inside the door. But I do
assure you, she had not thought of it before. Impatient and loving as
she was, her solicitude about Alice on that hurried morning had not
been mingled with any thought of him.

Her heart need not have leaped, her colour need not have rushed so
painfully to her cheeks, for he was not there. There was the round
table, with a cup and saucer, which had evidently been used, and
there was Jane Wilson sitting on the other side, crying quietly,
while she ate her breakfast with a sort of unconscious appetite. And
there was Mrs. Davenport washing away at a night-cap or so, which, by
their simple, old-world make, Mary knew at a glance were Alice's. But
nothing--no one else.

Alice was much the same, or rather better of the two, they told her;
at any rate she could speak, though it was sad rambling talk. Would
Mary like to see her?

Of course she would. Many are interested by seeing their friends
under the new aspect of illness; and among the poor there is no
wholesome fear of injury or excitement to restrain this wish.

So Mary went up-stairs, accompanied by Mrs. Davenport, wringing the
suds off her hands, and speaking in a loud whisper far more audible
than her usual voice.

"I mun be hastening home, but I'll come again to-night, time enough
to iron her cap; 'twould be a sin and a shame if we let her go dirty
now she's ill, when she's been so rare and clean all her life-long.
But she's sadly forsaken, poor thing! She'll not know you, Mary; she
knows none on us."

The room up-stairs held two beds, one superior in the grandeur of
four posts and checked curtains to the other, which had been occupied
by the twins in their brief life-time. The smaller had been Alice's
bed since she had lived there; but with the natural reverence to one
"stricken of God and afflicted," she had been installed since her
paralytic stroke the evening before in the larger and grander bed,
while Jane Wilson had taken her short broken rest on the little
pallet.

Margaret came forwards to meet her friend, whom she half expected,
and whose step she knew. Mrs. Davenport returned to her washing.

The two girls did not speak; the presence of Alice awed them into
silence. There she lay with the rosy colour, absent from her face
since the days of childhood, flushed once more into it by her
sickness nigh unto death. She lay on the affected side, and with
her other arm she was constantly sawing the air, not exactly in a
restless manner, but in a monotonous, incessant way, very trying to
a watcher. She was talking away, too, almost as constantly, in a low,
indistinct tone. But her face, her profiled countenance, looked calm
and smiling, even interested by the ideas that were passing through
her clouded mind.

"Listen!" said Margaret, as she stooped her head down to catch the
muttered words more distinctly.

"What will mother say? The bees are turning homeward for th' last
time, and we've a terrible long bit to go yet. See! here's a linnet's
nest in this gorse-bush. Th' hen-bird is on it. Look at her bright
eyes, she won't stir! Ay! we mun hurry home. Won't mother be pleased
with the bonny lot of heather we've got! Make haste, Sally, may be we
shall have cockles for supper. I saw th' cockle-man's donkey turn up
our way fra' Arnside."

Margaret touched Mary's hand, and the pressure in return told her
that they understood each other; that they knew how in this illness
to the old, world-weary woman, God had sent her a veiled blessing:
she was once more in the scenes of her childhood, unchanged and
bright as in those long departed days; once more with the sister of
her youth, the playmate of fifty years ago, who had for nearly as
many years slept in a grassy grave in the little church-yard beyond
Burton.

Alice's face changed; she looked sorrowful, almost penitent.

"Oh, Sally! I wish we'd told her. She thinks we were in church
all morning, and we've gone on deceiving her. If we'd told her at
first how it was--how sweet th' hawthorn smelt through the open
church-door, and how we were on th' last bench in the aisle, and
how it were the first butterfly we'd seen this spring, and how it
flew into th' very church itself; oh! mother is so gentle, I wish
we'd told her. I'll go to her next time she comes in sight, and say,
'Mother, we were naughty last Sabbath.'"

She stopped, and a few tears came stealing down the old withered
cheek, at the thought of the temptation and deceit of her childhood.
Surely, many sins could not have darkened that innocent child-like
spirit since. Mary found a red-spotted pocket-handkerchief, and put
it into the hand which sought about for something to wipe away the
trickling tears. She took it with a gentle murmur.

"Thank you, mother."

Mary pulled Margaret away from the bed.

"Don't you think she's happy, Margaret?"

"Ay! that I do, bless her. She feels no pain, and knows nought of her
present state. Oh! that I could see, Mary! I try and be patient with
her afore me, but I'd give aught I have to see her, and see what she
wants. I am so useless! I mean to stay here as long as Jane Wilson is
alone; and I would fain be here all to-night, but--"

"I'll come," said Mary, decidedly.

"Mrs. Davenport said she'd come again, but she's hard-worked all
day--"

"I'll come," repeated Mary.

"Do!" said Margaret, "and I'll be here till you come. May be, Jem and
you could take th' night between you, and Jane Wilson might get a bit
of sound sleep in his bed; for she were up and down the better part
of last night, and just when she were in a sound sleep this morning,
between two and three, Jem came home, and th' sound o' his voice
roused her in a minute."

"Where had he been till that time o' night?" asked Mary.

"Nay! it were none of my business; and, indeed, I never saw him
till he came in here to see Alice. He were in again this morning,
and seemed sadly downcast. But you'll, may be, manage to comfort
him to-night, Mary," said Margaret, smiling, while a ray of hope
glimmered in Mary's heart, and she almost felt glad, for an instant,
of the occasion which would at last bring them together. Oh! happy
night! when would it come? Many hours had yet to pass.

Then she saw Alice, and repented, with a bitter self-reproach. But
she could not help having gladness in the depths of her heart, blame
herself as she would. So she tried not to think, as she hurried along
to Miss Simmonds', with a dancing step of lightness.

She was late--that she knew she should be. Miss Simmonds was vexed
and cross. That also she had anticipated, but she had intended to
smooth her raven down by extraordinary diligence and attention. But
there was something about the girls she did not understand--had not
anticipated. They stopped talking when she came in; or rather, I
should say, stopped listening, for Sally Leadbitter was the talker to
whom they were hearkening with intense attention. At first they eyed
Mary, as if she had acquired some new interest to them, since the day
before. Then they began to whisper; and, absorbed as Mary had been in
her own thoughts, she could not help becoming aware that it was of
her they spoke.

At last Sally Leadbitter asked Mary if she had heard the news?

"No! What news?" answered she.

The girls looked at each other with gloomy mystery. Sally went on.

"Have you not heard that young Mr. Carson was murdered last night?"

Mary's lips could not utter a negative, but no one who looked at her
pale and terror-stricken face could have doubted that she had not
heard before of the fearful occurrence.

Oh, it is terrible, that sudden information, that one you have known
has met with a bloody death! You seem to shrink from the world where
such deeds can be committed, and to grow sick with the idea of the
violent and wicked men of earth. Much as Mary had learned to dread
him lately, now he was dead (and dead in such a manner) her feeling
was that of oppressive sorrow for him.

The room went round and round, and she felt as though she should
faint; but Miss Simmonds came in, bringing a waft of fresher air as
she opened the door, to refresh the body, and the certainty of a
scolding for inattention to brace the sinking mind. She, too, was
full of the morning's news.

"Have you heard any more of this horrid affair, Miss Barton?" asked
she, as she settled to her work.

Mary tried to speak; at first she could not, and when she succeeded
in uttering a sentence, it seemed as though it were not her own voice
that spoke.

"No, ma'am, I never heard of it till this minute."

"Dear! that's strange, for every one is up about it. I hope the
murderer will be found out, that I do. Such a handsome young man to
be killed as he was. I hope the wretch that did it may be hanged as
high as Haman."

One of the girls reminded them that the assizes came on next week.

"Ay," replied Miss Simmonds, "and the milk-man told me they will
catch the wretch, and have him tried and hung in less than a week.
Serve him right, whoever he is. Such a handsome young man as he was."

Then each began to communicate to Miss Simmonds the various reports
they had heard.

Suddenly she burst out--

"Miss Barton! as I live, dropping tears on that new silk gown of
Mrs. Hawkes'! Don't you know they will stain, and make it shabby for
ever? Crying like a baby, because a handsome young man meets with
an untimely end. For shame of yourself, miss. Mind your character
and your work if you please. Or, if you must cry" (seeing her
scolding rather increased the flow of Mary's tears, than otherwise),
"take this print to cry over. That won't be marked like this
beautiful silk," rubbing it, as if she loved it, with a clean
pocket-handkerchief, in order to soften the edges of the hard round
drops.

Mary took the print, and naturally enough, having had leave given her
to cry over it, rather checked the inclination to weep.

Every body was full of the one subject. The girl sent out to match
silk, came back with the account gathered at the shop, of the
coroner's inquest then sitting; the ladies who called to speak about
gowns first began about the murder, and mingled details of that, with
directions for their dresses. Mary felt as though the haunting horror
were a nightmare, a fearful dream, from which awakening would relieve
her. The picture of the murdered body, far more ghastly than the
reality, seemed to swim in the air before her eyes. Sally Leadbitter
looked and spoke of her, almost accusingly, and made no secret now of
Mary's conduct, more blameable to her fellow-workwomen for its latter
changeableness, than for its former giddy flirting.

"Poor young gentleman," said one, as Sally recounted Mary's last
interview with Mr. Carson.

"What a shame!" exclaimed another, looking indignantly at Mary.

"That's what I call regular jilting," said a third. "And he lying
cold and bloody in his coffin now!"

Mary was more thankful than she could express, when Miss Simmonds
returned, to put a stop to Sally's communications, and to check the
remarks of the girls.

She longed for the peace of Alice's sick room. No more thinking with
infinite delight of her anticipated meeting with Jem, she felt too
much shocked for that now; but longing for peace and kindness, for
the images of rest and beauty, and sinless times long ago, which the
poor old woman's rambling presented, she wished to be as near death
as Alice; and to have struggled through this world, whose sufferings
she had early learnt, and whose crimes now seemed pressing close upon
her. Old texts from the Bible that her mother used to read (or rather
spell out) aloud, in the days of childhood, came up to her memory.
"Where the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest."
"The tears shall be wiped away from all eyes," &c. And it was to that
world Alice was hastening! Oh! that she were Alice!

I must return to the Wilsons' house, which was far from being the
abode of peace that Mary was picturing it to herself. You remember
the reward Mr. Carson offered for the apprehension of the murderer of
his son? It was in itself a temptation, and to aid its efficacy came
the natural sympathy for the aged parents mourning for their child,
for the young man cut off in the flower of his days; and besides
this, there is always a pleasure in unravelling a mystery, in
catching at the gossamer clue which will guide to certainty. This
feeling, I am sure, gives much impetus to the police. Their senses
are ever and always on the qui-vive, and they enjoy the collecting
and collating evidence, and the life of adventure they experience: a
continual unwinding of Jack Sheppard romances, always interesting to
the vulgar and uneducated mind, to which the outward signs and tokens
of crime are ever exciting.

There was no lack of clue or evidence at the coroner's inquest that
morning. The shot, the finding of the body, the subsequent discovery
of the gun, were rapidly deposed to; and then the policeman who had
interrupted the quarrel between Jem Wilson and the murdered young
man was brought forward, and gave his evidence, clear, simple, and
straightforward. The coroner had no hesitation, the jury had none,
but the verdict was cautiously worded. "Wilful murder against some
person unknown."

This very cautiousness, when he deemed the thing so sure as to
require no caution, irritated Mr. Carson. It did not soothe him that
the superintendent called the verdict a mere form,--exhibited a
warrant empowering him to seize the body of Jem Wilson, committed on
suspicion,--declared his intention of employing a well-known officer
in the Detective Service to ascertain the ownership of the gun, and
to collect other evidence, especially as regarded the young woman,
about whom the policeman deposed that the quarrel had taken place:
Mr. Carson was still excited and irritable; restless in body and
mind. He made every preparation for the accusation of Jem the
following morning before the magistrates: he engaged attorneys
skilled in criminal practice to watch the case and prepare briefs;
he wrote to celebrated barristers coming the Northern Circuit, to
bespeak their services. A speedy conviction, a speedy execution,
seemed to be the only things that would satisfy his craving thirst
for blood. He would have fain been policeman, magistrate, accusing
speaker, all; but most of all, the judge, rising with full sentence
of death on his lips.

That afternoon, as Jane Wilson had begun to feel the effect of
a night's disturbed rest, evinced in frequent droppings off to
sleep while she sat by her sister-in-law's bed-side, lulled by the
incessant crooning of the invalid's feeble voice, she was startled by
a man speaking in the house-place below, who, wearied of knocking at
the door, without obtaining any answer, had entered and was calling
lustily for

"Missis! missis!"

When Mrs. Wilson caught a glimpse of the intruder through the
stair-rails, she at once saw he was a stranger, a working-man, it
might be a fellow-labourer with her son, for his dress was grimy
enough for the supposition. He held a gun in his hand.

"May I make bold to ask if this gun belongs to your son?"

She first looked at the man, and then, weary and half asleep,
not seeing any reason for refusing to answer the inquiry, she
moved forward to examine it, talking while she looked for certain
old-fashioned ornaments on the stock. "It looks like his; ay, it's
his, sure enough. I could speak to it anywhere by these marks. You
see it were his grandfather's, as were gamekeeper to some one up
in th' north; and they don't make guns so smart now-a-days. But,
how comed you by it? He sets great store on it. Is he bound for th'
shooting gallery? He is not, for sure, now his aunt is so ill, and me
left all alone;" and the immediate cause for her anxiety being thus
recalled to her mind, she entered on a long story of Alice's illness,
interspersed with recollections of her husband's and her children's
deaths.

The disguised policeman listened for a minute or two, to glean any
further information he could; and then, saying he was in a hurry, he
turned to go away. She followed him to the door, still telling him
her troubles, and was never struck, until it was too late to ask the
reason, with the unaccountableness of his conduct, in carrying the
gun away with him. Then, as she heavily climbed the stairs, she put
away the wonder and the thought about his conduct, by determining
to believe he was some workman with whom her son had made some
arrangement about shooting at the gallery; or mending the old weapon;
or something or other. She had enough to fret her, without moidering
herself about old guns. Jem had given it him to bring to her; so it
was safe enough; or, if it was not, why she should be glad never to
set eyes on it again, for she could not abide fire-arms, they were so
apt to shoot people.

So, comforting herself for her want of thought in not making further
inquiry, she fell off into another doze, feverish, dream-haunted, and
unrefreshing.

Meanwhile, the policeman walked off with his prize, with an odd
mixture of feelings; a little contempt, a little disappointment, and
a good deal of pity. The contempt and the disappointment were caused
by the widow's easy admission of the gun being her son's property,
and her manner of identifying it by the ornaments. He liked an
attempt to baffle him; he was accustomed to it; it gave some exercise
to his wits and his shrewdness. There would be no fun in fox-hunting,
if Reynard yielded himself up without any effort to escape. Then,
again, his mother's milk was yet in him, policeman, officer of the
Detective Service though he was; and he felt sorry for the old woman,
whose "softness" had given such material assistance in identifying
her son as the murderer. However, he conveyed the gun, and the
intelligence he had gained, to the superintendent; and the result
was, that, in a short time afterwards, three policemen went to the
works at which Jem was foreman, and announced their errand to the
astonished overseer, who directed them to the part of the foundry
where Jem was then superintending a casting.

Dark, black were the walls, the ground, the faces around them, as
they crossed the yard. But, in the furnace-house a deep and lurid
red glared over all; the furnace roared with mighty flame. The men,
like demons, in their fire-and-soot colouring, stood swart around,
awaiting the moment when the tons of solid iron should have melted
down into fiery liquid, fit to be poured, with still, heavy sound,
into the delicate moulding of fine black sand, prepared to receive
it. The heat was intense, and the red glare grew every instant more
fierce; the policemen stood awed with the novel sight. Then, black
figures, holding strange-shaped bucket shovels, came athwart the
deep-red furnace light, and clear and brilliant flowed forth the iron
into the appropriate mould. The buzz of voices rose again; there was
time to speak, and gasp, and wipe the brows; and then, one by one,
the men dispersed to some other branch of their employment.

No. B. 72 pointed out Jem as the man he had seen engaged in a
scuffle with Mr. Carson, and then the other two stepped forward and
arrested him, stating of what he was accused, and the grounds of the
accusation. He offered no resistance, though he seemed surprised; but
calling a fellow-workman to him, he briefly requested him to tell his
mother he had got into trouble, and could not return home at present.
He did not wish her to hear more at first.

So Mrs. Wilson's sleep was next interrupted in almost an exactly
similar way to the last, like a recurring nightmare.

"Missis! missis!" some one called out from below.

Again it was a workman, but this time a blacker-looking one than
before.

"What don ye want?" said she, peevishly.

"Only nothing but--" stammered the man, a kind-hearted matter-of-fact
person, with no invention, but a great deal of sympathy.

"Well! speak out, can't ye, and ha' done with it?"

"Jem's in trouble," said he, repeating Jem's very words, as he could
think of no others.

"Trouble!" said the mother, in a high-pitched voice of distress.
"Trouble! God help me, trouble will never end, I think. What d'ye
mean by trouble? Speak out, man, can't ye? Is he ill? My boy! tell
me, is he ill?" in a hurried voice of terror.

"Na, na, that's not it. He's well enough. All he bade me say was,
'Tell mother I'm in trouble, and can't come home to-night.'"

"Not come home to-night! And what am I to do with Alice? I can't go
on, wearing my life out wi' watching. He might come and help me."

"I tell you he can't," said the man.

"Can't; and he is well, you say? Stuff! It's just that he's getten
like other young men, and wants to go a-larking. But I'll give it him
when he comes back."

The man turned to go; he durst not trust himself to speak in Jem's
justification. But she would not let him off.

She stood between him and the door, as she said, "Yo shall not go,
till yo've told me what he's after. I can see plain enough you know,
and I'll know too, before I've done."

"You'll know soon enough, missis!"

"I'll know now, I tell ye. What's up that he can't come home and help
me nurse? Me, as never got a wink o' sleep last night wi' watching."

"Well, if you will have it out," said the poor badgered man, "the
police have got hold on him."

"On my Jem!" said the enraged mother. "You're a downright liar, and
that's what you are. My Jem, as never did harm to any one in his
life. You're a liar, that's what you are."

"He's done harm enough now," said the man, angry in his turn, "for
there's good evidence he murdered young Carson, as was shot last
night."

She staggered forward to strike the man for telling the terrible
truth; but the weakness of old age, of motherly agony, overcame her,
and she sank down on a chair, and covered her face. He could not
leave her.

When next she spoke, it was in an imploring, feeble, child-like
voice.

"Oh, master, say you're only joking. I ax your pardon if I have vexed
ye, but please say you're only joking. You don't know what Jem is to
me."

She looked humbly, anxiously up at him.

"I wish I were only joking, missis; but it's true as I say. They've
taken him up on charge o' murder. It were his gun as were found
near th' place; and one o' the police heard him quarrelling with Mr.
Carson a few days back, about a girl."

"About a girl!" broke in the mother, once more indignant, though
too feeble to show it as before. "My Jem was as steady as--" she
hesitated for a comparison wherewith to finish, and then repeated,
"as steady as Lucifer, and he were an angel, you know. My Jem was not
one to quarrel about a girl."

"Ay, but it was that, though. They'd got her name quite pat. The man
had heard all they said. Mary Barton was her name, whoever she may
be."

"Mary Barton! the dirty hussey! to bring my Jem into trouble of this
kind. I'll give it her well when I see her: that I will. Oh! my poor
Jem!" rocking herself to and fro. "And what about the gun? What did
ye say about that?"

"His gun were found on th' spot where the murder were done."

"That's a lie for one, then. A man has got the gun now, safe and
sound; I saw it not an hour ago."

The man shook his head.

"Yes, he has indeed. A friend o' Jem's, as he'd lent it to."

"Did you know the chap?" asked the man, who was really anxious for
Jem's exculpation, and caught a gleam of hope from her last speech.

"No! I can't say as I did. But he were put on as a workman."

"It's may be only one of them policemen, disguised."

"Nay; they'd never go for to do that, and trick me into telling on my
own son. It would be like seething a kid in its mother's milk; and
that th' Bible forbids."

"I don't know," replied the man.

Soon afterwards he went away, feeling unable to comfort, yet
distressed at the sight of sorrow; she would fain have detained him,
but go he would. And she was alone.

She never for an instant believed Jem guilty; she would have doubted
if the sun were fire, first: but sorrow, desolation, and, at times,
anger took possession of her mind. She told the unconscious Alice,
hoping to rouse her to sympathy; and then was disappointed, because,
still smiling and calm, she murmured of her mother, and the happy
days of infancy.




CHAPTER XX.

MARY'S DREAM--AND THE AWAKENING.


   "I saw where stark and cold he lay,
     Beneath the gallows-tree,
   And every one did point and say,
     ''Twas there he died for thee!'
    *      *      *      *      *      *
   "Oh! weeping heart! Oh, bleeding heart!
     What boots thy pity now?
   Bid from his eyes that shade depart,
     That death-damp from his brow!"

   "THE BIRTLE TRAGEDY."


So there was no more peace in the house of sickness, except to Alice,
the dying Alice.

But Mary knew nothing of the afternoon's occurrences; and gladly did
she breathe in the fresh air, as she left Miss Simmonds' house, to
hasten to the Wilsons'. The very change, from the in-door to the
out-door atmosphere, seemed to alter the current of her thoughts.
She thought less of the dreadful subject which had so haunted her
all day; she cared less for the upbraiding speeches of her fellow
work-women; the old association of comfort and sympathy received from
Alice gave her the idea that, even now, her bodily presence would
soothe and compose those who were in trouble, changed, unconscious,
and absent though her spirit might be.

Then, again, she reproached herself a little for the feeling of
pleasure she experienced, in thinking that he whom she dreaded could
never more beset her path; in the security with which she could pass
each street corner--each shop, where he used to lie in ambush. Oh!
beating heart! was there no other little thought of joy lurking
within, to gladden the very air without? Was she not going to meet,
to see, to hear Jem; and could they fail at last to understand each
other's loving hearts!

She softly lifted the latch, with the privilege of friendship. _He_
was not there, but his mother was standing by the fire, stirring some
little mess or other. Never mind! he would come soon: and with an
unmixed desire to do her grateful duty to all belonging to him, she
stepped lightly forwards, unheard by the old lady, who was partly
occupied by the simmering, bubbling sound of her bit of cookery; but
more with her own sad thoughts, and wailing, half-uttered murmurings.

Mary took off bonnet and shawl with speed, and advancing, made Mrs.
Wilson conscious of her presence, by saying,

"Let me do that for you. I'm sure you mun be tired."

Mrs. Wilson slowly turned round, and her eyes gleamed like those of a
pent-up wild beast, as she recognised her visitor.

"And is it thee that dares set foot in this house, after what has
come to pass? Is it not enough to have robbed me of my boy with
thy arts and thy profligacy, but thou must come here to crow over
me--me--his mother? Dost thou know where he is, thou bad hussy, with
thy great blue eyes and yellow hair, to lead men on to ruin? Out upon
thee, with thy angel's face, thou whited sepulchre! Dost thou know
where Jem is, all through thee?"

"No!" quivered out poor Mary, scarcely conscious that she spoke, so
daunted, so terrified was she by the indignant mother's greeting.

"He's lying in th' New Bailey," slowly and distinctly spoke the
mother, watching the effect of her words, as if believing in their
infinite power to pain. "There he lies, waiting to take his trial for
murdering young Mr. Carson."

There was no answer; but such a blanched face, such wild, distended
eyes, such trembling limbs, instinctively seeking support!

"Did you know Mr. Carson as now lies dead?" continued the merciless
woman. "Folk say you did, and knew him but too well. And that for the
sake of such as you, my precious child shot yon chap. But he did not.
I know he did not. They may hang him, but his mother will speak to
his innocence with her last dying breath."

She stopped more from exhaustion than want of words. Mary spoke, but
in so changed and choked a voice that the old woman almost started.
It seemed as if some third person must be in the room, the voice was
so hoarse and strange.

"Please, say it again. I don't quite understand you. What has Jem
done? Please to tell me."

"I never said he had done it. I said, and I'll swear that he never
did do it. I don't care who heard 'em quarrel, or if it is his gun as
were found near the body. It's not my own Jem as would go for to kill
any man, choose how a girl had jilted him. My own good Jem, as was
a blessing sent upon the house where he was born." Tears came into
the mother's burning eyes as her heart recurred to the days when she
had rocked the cradle of her "first-born;" and then, rapidly passing
over events, till the full consciousness of his present situation
came upon her, and perhaps annoyed at having shown any softness of
character in the presence of the Dalilah who had lured him to his
danger, she spoke again, and in a sharper tone.

"I told him, and told him to leave off thinking on thee; but he
wouldn't be led by me. Thee! wench! thou were not good enough to wipe
the dust off his feet. A vile, flirting quean as thou art. It's well
thy mother does not know (poor body) what a good-for-nothing thou
art."

"Mother! oh mother!" said Mary, as if appealing to the merciful dead.
"But I was not good enough for him! I know I was not," added she, in
a voice of touching humility.

For through her heart went tolling the ominous, prophetic words he
had used when he had last spoken to her--

"Mary! you'll may be hear of me as a drunkard, and may be as a thief,
and may be as a murderer. Remember! when all are speaking ill of me,
yo will have no right to blame me, for it's your cruelty that will
have made me what I feel I shall become."

And she did not blame him, though she doubted not his guilt; she felt
how madly she might act if once jealous of him, and how much cause
had she not given him for jealousy, miserable guilty wretch that she
was! Speak on, desolate mother! Abuse her as you will. Her broken
spirit feels to have merited all.

But her last humble, self-abased words had touched Mrs. Wilson's
heart, sore as it was; and she looked at the snow-pale girl with
those piteous eyes, so hopeless of comfort, and she relented in spite
of herself.

"Thou seest what comes of light conduct, Mary! It's thy doing that
suspicion has lighted on him, who is as innocent as the babe unborn.
Thou'lt have much to answer for if he's hung. Thou'lt have my death
too at thy door!"

Harsh as these words seem, she spoke them in a milder tone of voice
than she had yet used. But the idea of Jem on the gallows, Jem dead,
took possession of Mary, and she covered her eyes with her wan hands,
as if indeed to shut out the fearful sight.

She murmured some words, which, though spoken low, as if choked up
from the depths of agony, Jane Wilson caught. "My heart is breaking,"
said she, feebly. "My heart is breaking."

"Nonsense!" said Mrs. Wilson. "Don't talk in that silly way. My heart
has a better right to break than yours, and yet I hold up, you see.
But, oh dear! oh dear!" with a sudden revulsion of feeling, as the
reality of the danger in which her son was placed pressed upon her.
"What am I saying? How could I hold up if thou wert gone, Jem? Though
I'm as sure as I stand here of thy innocence, if they hang thee, my
lad, I will lie down and die!"

She sobbed aloud with bitter consciousness of the fearful chance
awaiting her child. She cried more passionately still.

Mary roused herself up.

"Oh, let me stay with you, at any rate, till we know the end. Dearest
Mrs. Wilson, mayn't I stay?"

The more obstinately and upbraidingly Mrs. Wilson refused, the more
Mary pleaded, with ever the same soft, entreating cry, "Let me stay
with you." Her stunned soul seemed to bound its wishes, for the hour
at least, to remaining with one who loved and sorrowed for the same
human being that she did.

But no. Mrs. Wilson was inflexible.

"I've may be been a bit hard on you, Mary, I'll own that. But
I cannot abide you yet with me. I cannot but remember it's your
giddiness as has wrought this woe. I'll stay wi' Alice, and perhaps
Mrs. Davenport may come help a bit. I cannot put up with you about
me. Good-night. To-morrow I may look on you different, may be.
Good-night."

And Mary turned out of the house, which had been _his_ home, where
_he_ was loved, and mourned for, into the busy, desolate, crowded
street, where they were crying halfpenny broadsides, giving
an account of the bloody murder, the coroner's inquest, and a
raw-head-and-bloody-bones picture of the suspected murderer, James
Wilson.

But Mary heard not, she heeded not. She staggered on like one in a
dream. With hung head and tottering steps, she instinctively chose
the shortest cut to that home, which was to her, in her present state
of mind, only the hiding place of four walls, where she might vent
her agony, unseen and unnoticed by the keen, unkind world without,
but where no welcome, no love, no sympathising tears awaited her.

As she neared that home, within two minutes' walk of it, her
impetuous course was arrested by a light touch on her arm, and
turning hastily, she saw a little Italian boy with his humble
show-box,--a white mouse, or some such thing. The setting sun cast
its red glow on his face, otherwise the olive complexion would have
been very pale; and the glittering tear-drops hung on the long curled
eye-lashes. With his soft voice and pleading looks, he uttered, in
his pretty broken English, the words

"Hungry! so hungry."

And, as if to aid by gesture the effect of the solitary word, he
pointed to his mouth, with its white quivering lips.

Mary answered him impatiently,

"Oh, lad, hunger is nothing--nothing!"

And she rapidly passed on. But her heart upbraided her the next
minute with her unrelenting speech, and she hastily entered her door
and seized the scanty remnant of food which the cupboard contained,
and retraced her steps to the place where the little hopeless
stranger had sunk down by his mute companion in loneliness and
starvation, and was raining down tears as he spoke in some foreign
tongue, with low cries for the far distant "Mamma mia!"

With the elasticity of heart belonging to childhood he sprang up as
he saw the food the girl brought; she whose face, lovely in its woe,
had tempted him first to address her; and, with the graceful courtesy
of his country, he looked up and smiled while he kissed her hand, and
then poured forth his thanks, and shared her bounty with his little
pet companion. She stood an instant, diverted from the thought of her
own grief by the sight of his infantine gladness; and then bending
down and kissing his smooth forehead, she left him, and sought to be
alone with her agony once more.

She re-entered the house, locked the door, and tore off her bonnet,
as if greedy of every moment which took her from the full indulgence
of painful, despairing thought.

Then she threw herself on the ground, yes, on the hard flags she
threw her soft limbs down; and the comb fell out of her hair, and
those bright tresses swept the dusty floor, while she pillowed and
hid her face on her arms, and burst forth into hard, suffocating
sobs.

Oh, earth! thou didst seem but a dreary dwelling-place for thy poor
child that night. None to comfort, none to pity! And self-reproach
gnawing at her heart.

Oh, why did she ever listen to the tempter? Why did she ever give ear
to her own suggestions, and cravings after wealth and grandeur? Why
had she thought it a fine thing to have a rich lover?

She--she had deserved it all; but he was the victim,--he, the
beloved. She could not conjecture, she could not even pause to think
who had revealed, or how he had discovered her acquaintance with
Harry Carson. It was but too clear, some way or another, he had
learnt all; and what would he think of her? No hope of his love,--oh,
that she would give up, and be content; it was his life, his precious
life, that was threatened. Then she tried to recall the particulars,
which, when Mrs. Wilson had given them, had fallen but upon a
deafened ear,--something about a gun, a quarrel, which she could
not remember clearly. Oh, how terrible to think of his crime, his
blood-guiltiness; he who had hitherto been so good, so noble, and
now an assassin! And then she shrank from him in thought; and then,
with bitter remorse, clung more closely to his image with passionate
self-upbraiding. Was it not she who had led him to the pit into which
he had fallen? Was she to blame him? She to judge him? Who could
tell how maddened he might have been by jealousy; how one moment's
uncontrollable passion might have led him to become a murderer?
And she had blamed him in her heart after his last deprecating,
imploring, prophetic speech!

Then she burst out crying afresh; and when weary of crying, fell to
thinking again. The gallows! The gallows! Black it stood against
the burning light which dazzled her shut eyes, press on them as she
would. Oh! she was going mad; and for awhile she lay outwardly still,
but with the pulses careering through her head with wild vehemence.

And then came a strange forgetfulness of the present, in thought of
the long-past times;--of those days when she hid her face on her
mother's pitying, loving bosom, and heard tender words of comfort,
be her grief or her error what it might;--of those days when she had
felt as if her mother's love was too mighty not to last for ever;--of
those days when hunger had been to her (as to the little stranger
she had that evening relieved) something to be thought about, and
mourned over;--when Jem and she had played together; he, with
the condescension of an older child, and she, with unconscious
earnestness, believing that he was as much gratified with important
trifles as she was;--when her father was a cheery-hearted man, rich
in the love of his wife, and the companionship of his friend;--when
(for it still worked round to that), when mother was alive, and _he_
was not a murderer.

And then Heaven blessed her unaware, and she sank from remembering,
to wandering, unconnected thought, and thence to sleep. Yes! it was
sleep, though in that strange posture, on that hard cold bed; and she
dreamt of the happy times of long ago, and her mother came to her,
and kissed her as she lay, and once more the dead were alive again
in that happy world of dreams. All was restored to the gladness of
childhood, even to the little kitten which had been her playmate and
bosom friend then, and which had been long forgotten in her waking
hours. All the loved ones were there!

She suddenly wakened! Clear and wide awake! Some noise had startled
her from sleep. She sat up, and put her hair (still wet with tears)
back from her flushed cheeks, and listened. At first she could only
hear her beating heart. All was still without, for it was after
midnight, such hours of agony had passed away; but the moon shone
clearly in at the unshuttered window, making the room almost as light
as day, in its cold ghastly radiance. There was a low knock at the
door! A strange feeling crept over Mary's heart, as if something
spiritual were near; as if the dead, so lately present in her dreams,
were yet gliding and hovering round her, with their dim, dread forms.
And yet, why dread? Had they not loved her?--and who loved her now?
Was she not lonely enough to welcome the spirits of the dead, who had
loved her while here? If her mother had conscious being, her love for
her child endured. So she quieted her fears, and listened--listened
still.

"Mary! Mary! open the door!" as a little movement on her part seemed
to tell the being outside of her wakeful, watchful state. They
were the accents of her mother's voice; the very south-country
pronunciation, that Mary so well remembered; and which she had
sometimes tried to imitate when alone, with the fond mimicry of
affection.

So, without fear, without hesitation, she rose and unbarred the door.
There, against the moonlight, stood a form, so closely resembling her
dead mother, that Mary never doubted the identity, but exclaiming
(as if she were a terrified child, secure of safety when near the
protecting care of its parent)--

"Oh! mother! mother! You are come at last!"

She threw herself, or rather fell, into the trembling arms of her
long-lost, unrecognised aunt Esther.




CHAPTER XXI.

ESTHER'S MOTIVE IN SEEKING MARY.


   "My rest is gone,
     My heart is sore,
   Peace find I never,
     And never more."

   MARGARET'S SONG IN "FAUST."


I must go back a little to explain the motives which caused Esther to
seek an interview with her niece.

The murder had been committed early on Thursday night, and between
then and the dawn of the following day there was ample time for the
news to spread far and wide among all those whose duty, or whose
want, or whose errors, caused them to be abroad in the streets of
Manchester.

Among those who listened to the tale of violence was Esther.

A craving desire to know more took possession of her mind. Far away
as she was from Turner Street, she immediately set off to the scene
of the murder, which was faintly lighted by the gray dawn as she
reached the spot. It was so quiet and still that she could hardly
believe it to be the place. The only vestige of any scuffle or
violence was a trail on the dust, as if somebody had been lying
there, and then been raised by extraneous force. The little birds
were beginning to hop and twitter in the leafless hedge, making
the only sound that was near and distinct. She crossed into the
field where she guessed the murderer to have stood; it was easy of
access, for the worn, stunted hawthorn-hedge had many gaps in it.
The night-smell of bruised grass came up from under her feet, as she
went towards the saw-pit and carpenter's shed, which, as I have said
before, were in a corner of the field near the road, and where one of
her informants had told her it was supposed by the police that the
murderer had lurked while waiting for his victim. There was no sign,
however, that any one had been about the place. If the grass had
been bruised or bent where he had trod, it had had enough of the
elasticity of life to raise itself under the dewy influences of
night. She hushed her breath with involuntary awe, but nothing else
told of the violent deed by which a fellow-creature had passed away.
She stood still for a minute, imagining to herself the position of
the parties, guided by the only circumstance which afforded any
evidence, the trailing mark on the dust in the road.

Suddenly (it was before the sun had risen above the horizon) she
became aware of something white in the hedge. All other colours
wore the same murky hue, though the forms of objects were perfectly
distinct. What was it? It could not be a flower;--that, the time of
year made clear. A frozen lump of snow, lingering late in one of the
gnarled tufts of the hedge? She stepped forward to examine. It proved
to be a little piece of stiff writing-paper compressed into a round
shape. She understood it instantly; it was the paper that had served
as wadding for the murderer's gun. Then she had been standing just
where the murderer must have been but a few hours before; probably
(as the rumour had spread through the town, reaching her ears) one of
the poor maddened turn-outs, who hung about everywhere, with black,
fierce looks, as if contemplating some deed of violence. Her sympathy
was all with them, for she had known what they suffered; and besides
this there was her own individual dislike of Mr. Carson, and dread
of him for Mary's sake. Yet, poor Mary! Death was a terrible, though
sure, remedy for the evil Esther had dreaded for her; and how would
she stand the shock, loving as her aunt believed her to do? Poor
Mary! who would comfort her? Esther's thoughts began to picture her
sorrow, her despair, when the news of her lover's death should reach
her; and she longed to tell her there might have been a keener grief
yet had he lived.

Bright, beautiful came the slanting rays of the morning sun. It was
time for such as she to hide themselves, with the other obscene
things of night, from the glorious light of day, which was only for
the happy. So she turned her steps towards town, still holding the
paper. But in getting over the hedge it encumbered her to hold it in
her clasped hand, and she threw it down. She passed on a few steps,
her thoughts still of Mary, till the idea crossed her mind, could it
(blank as it appeared to be) give any clue to the murderer? As I said
before, her sympathies were all on that side, so she turned back and
picked it up; and then feeling as if in some measure an accessory,
she hid it unexamined in her hand, and hastily passed out of the
street at the opposite end to that by which she had entered it.

And what do you think she felt, when, having walked some distance
from the spot, she dared to open the crushed paper, and saw written
on it Mary Barton's name, and not only that, but the street in which
she lived! True, a letter or two was torn off, but, nevertheless,
there was the name clear to be recognised. And oh! what terrible
thought flashed into her mind; or was it only fancy? But it looked
very like the writing which she had once known well--the writing of
Jem Wilson, who, when she lived at her brother-in-law's, and he was a
near neighbour, had often been employed by her to write her letters
to people, to whom she was ashamed of sending her own misspelt
scrawl. She remembered the wonderful flourishes she had so much
admired in those days, while she sat by dictating, and Jem, in all
the pride of newly-acquired penmanship, used to dazzle her eyes by
extraordinary graces and twirls.

If it were his!

Oh! perhaps it was merely that her head was running so on Mary, that
she was associating every trifle with her. As if only one person
wrote in that flourishing, meandering style!

It was enough to fill her mind to think from what she might have
saved Mary by securing the paper. She would look at it just once
more, and see if some very dense and stupid policeman could have
mistaken the name, or if Mary would certainly have been dragged into
notice in the affair.

No! no one could have mistaken the "ry Barton," and it _was_ Jem's
handwriting!

Oh! if it was so, she understood it all, and she had been the cause!
With her violent and unregulated nature, rendered morbid by the
course of life she led, and her consciousness of her degradation, she
cursed herself for the interference which she believed had led to
this; for the information and the warning she had given to Jem, which
had roused him to this murderous action. How could she, the abandoned
and polluted outcast, ever have dared to hope for a blessing, even on
her efforts to do good? The black curse of Heaven rested on all her
doings, were they for good or for evil.

Poor, diseased mind! and there were none to minister to thee!

So she wandered about, too restless to take her usual heavy morning's
sleep, up and down the streets, greedily listening to every word of
the passers by, and loitering near each group of talkers, anxious
to scrape together every morsel of information, or conjecture, or
suspicion, though without possessing any definite purpose in all
this. And ever and always she clenched the scrap of paper which might
betray so much, until her nails had deeply indented the palm of her
hand; so fearful was she in her nervous dread, lest unawares she
should let it drop.

Towards the middle of the day she could no longer evade the body's
craving want of rest and refreshment; but the rest was taken in a
spirit vault, and the refreshment was a glass of gin.

Then she started up from the stupor she had taken for repose; and
suddenly driven before the gusty impulses of her mind, she pushed her
way to the place where at that very time the police were bringing
the information they had gathered with regard to the all-engrossing
murder. She listened with painful acuteness of comprehension to
dropped words and unconnected sentences, the meaning of which became
clearer, and yet more clear to her. Jem was suspected. Jem was
ascertained to be the murderer.

She saw him (although he, absorbed in deep sad thought, saw her not),
she saw him brought hand-cuffed and guarded out of the coach. She saw
him enter the station,--she gasped for breath till he came out, still
hand-cuffed, and still guarded, to be conveyed to the New Bailey.

He was the only one who had spoken to her with hope, that she might
yet win her way back to virtue. His words had lingered in her heart
with a sort of call to Heaven, like distant Sabbath bells, although
in her despair she had turned away from his voice. He was the only
one who had spoken to her kindly. The murder, shocking though it was,
was an absent, abstract thing, on which her thoughts could not, and
would not dwell; all that was present in her mind was Jem's danger,
and his kindness.

Then Mary came to remembrance. Esther wondered till she was sick of
wondering, in what way she was taking the affair. In some manner it
would be a terrible blow for the poor, motherless girl; with her
dreadful father, too, who was to Esther a sort of accusing angel.

She set off towards the court where Mary lived, to pick up what she
could there of information. But she was ashamed to enter in where
once she had been innocent, and hung about the neighbouring streets,
not daring to question, so she learnt but little; nothing in fact but
the knowledge of John Barton's absence from home.

She went up a dark entry to rest her weary limbs on a door-step and
think. Her elbows on her knees, her face hidden in her hands, she
tried to gather together and arrange her thoughts. But still every
now and then she opened her hand to see if the paper were yet there.

She got up at last. She had formed a plan, and had a course of action
to look forward to that would satisfy one craving desire at least.
The time was long gone by when there was much wisdom or consistency
in her projects.

It was getting late, and that was so much the better. She went to a
pawn-shop, and took off her finery in a back room. She was known by
the people, and had a character for honesty, so she had no very great
difficulty in inducing them to let her have a suit of outer clothes,
befitting the wife of a working-man, a black silk bonnet, a printed
gown, a plaid shawl, dirty and rather worn to be sure, but which had
a sort of sanctity to the eyes of the street-walker as being the
appropriate garb of that happy class to which she could never, never
more belong.

She looked at herself in the little glass which hung against the
wall, and sadly shaking her head, thought how easy were the duties
of that Eden of innocence from which she was shut out; how she would
work, and toil, and starve, and die, if necessary, for a husband, a
home,--for children,--but that thought she could not bear; a little
form rose up, stern in its innocence, from the witches' cauldron of
her imagination, and she rushed into action again.

You know now how she came to stand by the threshold of Mary's door,
waiting, trembling, until the latch was lifted, and her niece, with
words that spoke of such desolation among the living, fell into her
arms.

She had felt as if some holy spell would prevent her (even as the
unholy Lady Geraldine was prevented, in the abode of Christabel)
from crossing the threshold of that home of her early innocence; and
she had meant to wait for an invitation. But Mary's helpless action
did away with all reluctant feeling, and she bore or dragged her
to a seat, and looked on her bewildered eyes, as, puzzled with the
likeness, which was not identity, she gazed on her aunt's features.

In pursuance of her plan, Esther meant to assume the manners and
character, as she had done the dress, of a mechanic's wife; but then,
to account for her long absence, and her long silence towards all
that ought to have been dear to her, it was necessary that she should
put on an indifference far distant from her heart, which was loving
and yearning, in spite of all its faults. And, perhaps, she overacted
her part, for certainly Mary felt a kind of repugnance to the changed
and altered aunt, who so suddenly re-appeared on the scene; and it
would have cut Esther to the very core, could she have known how her
little darling of former days was feeling towards her.

"You don't remember me I see, Mary!" she began. "It's a long while
since I left you all, to be sure; and I, many a time, thought of
coming to see you, and--and your father. But I live so far off, and
am always so busy, I cannot do just what I wish. You recollect aunt
Esther, don't you, Mary?"

"Are you aunt Hetty?" asked Mary, faintly, still looking at the face
which was so different from the old recollections of her aunt's fresh
dazzling beauty.

"Yes! I am aunt Hetty. Oh! it's so long since I heard that name,"
sighing forth the thoughts it suggested; then recovering herself,
and striving after the hard character she wished to assume, she
continued: "And to-day I heard a friend of yours, and of mine too,
long ago, was in trouble, and I guessed you would be in sorrow, so
I thought I would just step this far and see you."

Mary's tears flowed afresh, but she had no desire to open her heart
to her strangely-found aunt, who had, by her own confession, kept
aloof from and neglected them for so many years. Yet she tried to
feel grateful for kindness (however late) from any one, and wished to
be civil. Moreover, she had a strong disinclination to speak on the
terrible subject uppermost in her mind. So, after a pause she said,

"Thank you. I dare say you mean very kind. Have you had a long walk?
I'm so sorry," said she, rising, with a sudden thought, which was as
suddenly checked by recollection, "but I've nothing to eat in the
house, and I'm sure you must be hungry, after your walk."

For Mary concluded that certainly her aunt's residence must be
far away on the other side of the town, out of sight or hearing.
But, after all, she did not think much about her; her heart was so
aching-full of other things, that all besides seemed like a dream.
She received feelings and impressions from her conversation with her
aunt, but did not, could not, put them together, or think or argue
about them.

And Esther! How scanty had been her food for days and weeks, her
thinly-covered bones and pale lips might tell, but her words should
never reveal! So, with a little unreal laugh, she replied,

"Oh! Mary, my dear! don't talk about eating. We've the best of every
thing, and plenty of it, for my husband is in good work. I'd such a
supper before I came out. I couldn't touch a morsel if you had it."

Her words shot a strange pang through Mary's heart. She had always
remembered her aunt's loving and unselfish disposition; how was it
changed, if, living in plenty, she had never thought it worth while
to ask after her relations, who were all but starving! She shut up
her heart instinctively against her aunt.

And all the time poor Esther was swallowing her sobs, and over-acting
her part, and controlling herself more than she had done for many a
long day, in order that her niece might not be shocked and revolted,
by the knowledge of what her aunt had become:--a prostitute; an
outcast.

For she longed to open her wretched, wretched heart, so hopeless, so
abandoned by all living things, to one who had loved her once; and
yet she refrained, from dread of the averted eye, the altered voice,
the internal loathing, which she feared such disclosure might create.
She would go straight to the subject of the day. She could not tarry
long, for she felt unable to support the character she had assumed
for any length of time.

They sat by the little round table, facing each other. The candle was
placed right between them, and Esther moved it in order to have a
clearer view of Mary's face, so that she might read her emotions, and
ascertain her interests. Then she began:

"It's a bad business, I'm afraid, this of Mr. Carson's murder."

Mary winced a little.

"I hear Jem Wilson is taken up for it."

Mary covered her eyes with her hands, as if to shade them from the
light, and Esther herself, less accustomed to self-command, was
getting too much agitated for calm observation of another.

"I was taking a walk near Turner Street, and I went to see the spot,"
continued Esther, "and, as luck would have it, I spied this bit of
paper in the hedge," producing the precious piece still folded in her
hand. "It has been used as wadding for the gun, I reckon; indeed,
that's clear enough, from the shape it's crammed into. I was sorry
for the murderer, whoever he might be (I didn't then know of Jem's
being suspected), and I thought I would never leave a thing about
as might help, if ever so little, to convict him; the police are so
'cute about straws. So I carried it a little way, and then I opened
it and saw your name, Mary."

Mary took her hands away from her eyes, and looked with surprise at
her aunt's face, as she uttered these words. She _was_ kind after
all, for was she not saving her from being summoned, and from being
questioned and examined; a thing to be dreaded above all others: as
she felt sure that her unwilling answers, frame them how she might,
would add to the suspicions against Jem; her aunt was indeed kind, to
think of what would spare her this.

Esther went on, without noticing Mary's look. The very action of
speaking was so painful to her, and so much interrupted by the hard,
raking little cough, which had been her constant annoyance for
months, that she was too much engrossed by the physical difficulty of
utterance, to be a very close observer.

"There could be no mistake if they had found it. Look at your name,
together with the very name of this court! And in Jem's hand-writing
too, or I'm much mistaken. Look, Mary!"

And now she did watch her.

Mary took the paper and flattened it; then suddenly stood stiff up,
with irrepressible movement, as if petrified by some horror abruptly
disclosed; her face, strung and rigid; her lips compressed tight,
to keep down some rising exclamation. She dropped on her seat, as
suddenly as if the braced muscles had in an instant given way. But
she spoke no word.

"It is his hand-writing--isn't it?" asked Esther, though Mary's
manner was almost confirmation enough.

"You will not tell. You never will tell," demanded Mary, in a tone so
sternly earnest, as almost to be threatening.

"Nay, Mary," said Esther, rather reproachfully, "I am not so bad as
that. Oh! Mary, you cannot think I would do that, whatever I may be."

The tears sprang to her eyes at the idea that she was suspected of
being one who would help to inform against an old friend.

Mary caught her sad and upbraiding look.

"No! I know you would not tell, aunt. I don't know what I say, I am
so shocked. But say you will not tell. Do."

"No, indeed I will not tell, come what may."

Mary sat still, looking at the writing, and turning the paper round
with careful examination, trying to hope, but her very fears belying
her hopes.

"I thought you cared for the young man that's murdered," observed
Esther, half aloud; but feeling that she could not mistake this
strange interest in the suspected murderer, implied by Mary's
eagerness to screen him from any thing which might strengthen
suspicion against him. She had come, desirous to know the extent of
Mary's grief for Mr. Carson, and glad of the excuse afforded her
by the important scrap of paper. Her remark about its being Jem's
hand-writing, she had, with this view of ascertaining Mary's state of
feeling, felt to be most imprudent the instant after she uttered it;
but Mary's anxiety that she should not tell was too great, and too
decided, to leave a doubt as to her interest for Jem. She grew more
and more bewildered, and her dizzy head refused to reason. Mary
never spoke. She held the bit of paper firmly, determined to retain
possession of it, come what might; and anxious, and impatient, for
her aunt to go. As she sat, her face bore a likeness to Esther's dead
child.

"You are so like my little girl, Mary!" said Esther, weary of the one
subject on which she could get no satisfaction, and recurring, with
full heart, to the thought of the dead.

Mary looked up. Her aunt had children, then. That was all the idea
she received. No faint imagination of the love and the woe of that
poor creature crossed her mind, or she would have taken her, all
guilty and erring, to her bosom, and tried to bind up the broken
heart. No! it was not to be. Her aunt had children, then; and she was
on the point of putting some question about them, but before it could
be spoken another thought turned it aside, and she went back to her
task of unravelling the mystery of the paper, and the hand-writing.
Oh! how she wished her aunt would go.

As if, according to the believers in mesmerism, the intenseness
of her wish gave her power over another, although the wish was
unexpressed, Esther felt herself unwelcome, and that her absence was
desired.

She felt this some time before she could summon up resolution to go.
She was so much disappointed in this longed-for, dreaded interview
with Mary; she had wished to impose upon her with her tale of married
respectability, and yet she had yearned and craved for sympathy in
her real lot. And she had imposed upon her well. She should perhaps
be glad of it afterwards; but her desolation of hope seemed for the
time redoubled. And she must leave the old dwelling-place, whose very
walls, and flags, dingy and sordid as they were, had a charm for her.
Must leave the abode of poverty, for the more terrible abodes of
vice. She must--she would go.

"Well, good-night, Mary. That bit of paper is safe enough with you, I
see. But you made me promise I would not tell about it, and you must
promise me to destroy it before you sleep."

"I promise," said Mary, hoarsely, but firmly. "Then you are going?"

"Yes. Not if you wish me to stay. Not if I could be of any comfort to
you, Mary;" catching at some glimmering hope.

"Oh, no," said Mary, anxious to be alone. "Your husband will be
wondering where you are. Some day you must tell me all about
yourself. I forget what your name is?"

"Fergusson," said Esther, sadly.

"Mrs. Fergusson," repeated Mary, half unconsciously. "And where did
you say you lived?"

"I never did say," muttered Esther; then aloud, "In Angel's Meadow,
145, Nicholas Street."

"145, Nicholas Street, Angel Meadow. I shall remember."

As Esther drew her shawl around her, and prepared to depart, a
thought crossed Mary's mind that she had been cold and hard in her
manner towards one, who had certainly meant to act kindly in bringing
her the paper (that dread, terrible piece of paper) and thus saving
her from--she could not rightly think how much, or how little she
was spared. So, desirous of making up for her previous indifferent
manner, she advanced to kiss her aunt before her departure.

But, to her surprise, her aunt pushed her off with a frantic kind of
gesture, and saying the words,

"Not me. You must never kiss me. You!"

She rushed into the outer darkness of the street, and there wept long
and bitterly.




CHAPTER XXII.

MARY'S EFFORTS TO PROVE AN ALIBI.


   "There was a listening fear in her regard,
   As if calamity had but begun;
   As if the vanward clouds of evil days
   Had spent their malice, and the sullen rear
   Was, with its stored thunder, labouring up."

   KEATS' "HYPERION."


No sooner was Mary alone than she fastened the door, and put the
shutters up against the window, which had all this time remained
shaded only by the curtains hastily drawn together on Esther's
entrance, and the lighting of the candle.

She did all this with the same compressed lips, and the same stony
look that her face had assumed on the first examination of the paper.
Then she sat down for an instant to think; and rising directly, went,
with a step rendered firm by inward resolution of purpose, up the
stairs;--passed her own door, two steps, into her father's room. What
did she want there?

I must tell you; I must put into words the dreadful secret which she
believed that bit of paper had revealed to her.

Her father was the murderer!

That corner of stiff, shining, thick writing-paper, she recognised as
part of the sheet on which she had copied Samuel Bamford's beautiful
lines so many months ago--copied (as you perhaps remember) on the
blank part of a valentine sent to her by Jem Wilson, in those days
when she did not treasure and hoard up every thing he had touched, as
she would do now.

That copy had been given to her father, for whom it was made, and
she had occasionally seen him reading it over, not a fortnight
ago she was sure. But she resolved to ascertain if the other part
still remained in his possession. He might, it was just possible he
_might_, have given it away to some friend; and if so, that person
was the guilty one, for she could swear to the paper anywhere.

First of all she pulled out every article from the little old chest
of drawers. Amongst them were some things which had belonged to her
mother, but she had no time now to examine and try and remember them.
All the reverence she could pay them was to carry them and lay them
on the bed carefully, while the other things were tossed impatiently
out upon the floor.

The copy of Bamford's lines was not there. Oh! perhaps he might have
given it away; but then must it not have been to Jem? It was his gun.

And she set to with redoubled vigour to examine the deal-box which
served as chair, and which had once contained her father's Sunday
clothes, in the days when he could afford to have Sunday clothes.

He had redeemed his better coat from the pawn-shop before he left,
that she had noticed. Here was his old one. What rustled under her
hand in the pocket?

The paper! "Oh! Father!"

Yes, it fitted; jagged end to jagged end, letter to letter; and even
the part which Esther had considered blank had its tallying mark with
the larger piece, its tails of _y_s and _g_s. And then, as if that
were not damning evidence enough, she felt again, and found some
bullets or shot (I don't know which you would call them) in that
same pocket, along with a small paper parcel of gunpowder. As she
was going to replace the jacket, having abstracted the paper, and
bullets, &c., she saw a woollen gun-case made of that sort of striped
horse-cloth you must have seen a thousand times appropriated to such
a purpose. The sight of it made her examine still further, but there
was nothing else that could afford any evidence, so she locked the
box, and sat down on the floor to contemplate the articles; now with
a sickening despair, now with a kind of wondering curiosity, how
her father had managed to evade observation. After all it was easy
enough. He had evidently got possession of some gun (was it really
Jem's; was he an accomplice? No! she did not believe it; he never,
never would deliberately plan a murder with another, however he might
be wrought up to it by passionate feeling at the time. Least of all
would he accuse her to her father, without previously warning her; it
was out of his nature).

Then having obtained possession of the gun, her father had loaded it
at home, and might have carried it away with him some time when the
neighbours were not noticing, and she was out, or asleep; and then he
might have hidden it somewhere to be in readiness when he should want
it. She was sure he had no such thing with him when he went away the
last time.

She felt it was of no use to conjecture his motives. His actions
had become so wild and irregular of late, that she could not reason
upon them. Besides, was it not enough to know that he was guilty of
this terrible offence? Her love for her father seemed to return with
painful force, mixed up as it was with horror at his crime. That
dear father, who was once so kind, so warm-hearted, so ready to help
either man or beast in distress, to murder! But, in the desert of
misery with which these thoughts surrounded her, the arid depths of
whose gloom she dared not venture to contemplate, a little spring of
comfort was gushing up at her feet, unnoticed at first, but soon to
give her strength and hope.

And _that_ was the necessity for exertion on her part which this
discovery enforced.

Oh! I do think that the necessity for exertion, for some kind of
action (bodily or mental) in time of distress, is a most infinite
blessing, although the first efforts at such seasons are painful.
Something to be done implies that there is yet hope of some good
thing to be accomplished, or some additional evil that may be
avoided; and by degrees the hope absorbs much of the sorrow.

It is the woes that cannot in any earthly way be escaped that admit
least earthly comforting. Of all trite, worn-out, hollow mockeries
of comfort that were ever uttered by people who will not take the
trouble of sympathising with others, the one I dislike the most
is the exhortation not to grieve over an event, "for it cannot be
helped." Do you think if I could help it, I would sit still with
folded hands, content to mourn? Do you not believe that as long as
hope remained I would be up and doing? I mourn because what has
occurred cannot be helped. The reason you give me for not grieving,
is the very and sole reason of my grief. Give me nobler and higher
reasons for enduring meekly what my Father sees fit to send, and I
will try earnestly and faithfully to be patient; but mock me not, or
any other mourner, with the speech, "Do not grieve, for it cannot be
helped. It is past remedy."

But some remedy to Mary's sorrow came with thinking. If her father
was guilty, Jem was innocent. If innocent, there was a possibility of
saving him. He must be saved. And she must do it; for was not she the
sole depository of the terrible secret? Her father was not suspected;
and never should be, if by any foresight or any exertions of her own
she could prevent it.

She did not yet know how Jem was to be saved, while her father
was also to be considered innocent. It would require much thought
and much prudence. But with the call upon her exertions, and her
various qualities of judgment and discretion, came the answering
consciousness of innate power to meet the emergency. Every step now,
nay, the employment of every minute, was of consequence; for you
must remember she had learnt at Miss Simmonds' the probability that
the murderer would be brought to trial the next week. And you must
remember, too, that never was so young a girl so friendless, or so
penniless, as Mary was at this time. But the lion accompanied Una
through the wilderness and the danger; and so will a high, resolved
purpose of right-doing ever guard and accompany the helpless.

It struck two; deep, mirk, night.

It was of no use bewildering herself with plans this weary, endless
night. Nothing could be done before morning: and, at first in her
impatience, she began to long for day; but then she felt in how unfit
a state her body was for any plan of exertion, and she resolutely
made up her mind to husband her physical strength.

First of all she must burn the tell-tale paper. The powder, bullets,
and gun-case, she tied into a bundle, and hid in the sacking of
the bed for the present, although there was no likelihood of their
affording evidence against any one. Then she carried the paper down
stairs, and burnt it on the hearth, powdering the very ashes with her
fingers, and dispersing the fragments of fluttering black films among
the cinders of the grate. Then she breathed again.

Her head ached with dizzying violence; she must get quit of the pain
or it would incapacitate her for thinking and planning. She looked
for food, but there was nothing but a little raw oatmeal in the
house: still, although it almost choked her, she ate some of this,
knowing from experience, how often headaches were caused by long
fasting. Then she sought for some water to bathe her throbbing
temples, and quench her feverish thirst. There was none in the house,
so she took the jug and went out to the pump at the other end of
the court, whose echoes resounded her light footsteps in the quiet
stillness of the night. The hard, square outlines of the houses cut
sharply against the cold bright sky, from which myriads of stars
were shining down in eternal repose. There was little sympathy in
the outward scene, with the internal trouble. All was so still, so
motionless, so hard! Very different to this lovely night in the
country in which I am now writing, where the distant horizon is soft
and undulating in the moonlight, and the nearer trees sway gently to
and fro in the night-wind with something of almost human motion; and
the rustling air makes music among their branches, as if speaking
soothingly to the weary ones who lie awake in heaviness of heart. The
sights and sounds of such a night lull pain and grief to rest.

But Mary re-entered her home after she had filled her pitcher, with
a still stronger sense of anxiety, and a still clearer conviction of
how much rested upon her unassisted and friendless self, alone with
her terrible knowledge, in the hard, cold, populous world.

She bathed her forehead, and quenched her thirst, and then, with wise
deliberation of purpose, went upstairs, and undressed herself, as if
for a long night's slumber, although so few hours intervened before
day-dawn. She believed she never could sleep, but she lay down, and
shut her eyes; and before many minutes she was in as deep and sound a
slumber as if there was no sin nor sorrow in the world.

She awakened, as it was natural, much refreshed in body; but with a
consciousness of some great impending calamity. She sat up in bed
to recollect, and when she did remember, she sank down again with
all the helplessness of despair. But it was only the weakness of an
instant; for were not the very minutes precious, for deliberation if
not for action?

Before she had finished the necessary morning business of dressing,
and setting her house in some kind of order, she had disentangled her
ravelled ideas, and arranged some kind of a plan for action. If Jem
was innocent (and now, of his guilt, even his slightest participation
in, or knowledge of, the murder, she acquitted him with all her
heart and soul), he must have been somewhere else when the crime was
committed; probably with some others, who might bear witness to the
fact, if she only knew where to find them. Every thing rested on her.
She had heard of an alibi, and believed it might mean the deliverance
she wished to accomplish; but she was not quite sure, and determined
to apply to Job, as one of the few among her acquaintance gifted with
the knowledge of hard words, for to her, all terms of law, or natural
history, were alike many-syllabled mysteries.

No time was to be lost. She went straight to Job Legh's house, and
found the old man and his grand-daughter sitting at breakfast; as she
opened the door she heard their voices speaking in a grave, hushed,
subdued tone, as if something grieved their hearts. They stopped
talking on her entrance, and then she knew they had been conversing
about the murder; about Jem's probable guilt; and (it flashed upon
her for the first time) on the new light they would have obtained
regarding herself: for until now they had never heard of her giddy
flirting with Mr. Carson; not in all her confidential talk with
Margaret had she ever spoken of him. And now Margaret would hear her
conduct talked of by all, as that of a bold, bad girl; and even if
she did not believe every thing that was said, she could hardly help
feeling wounded, and disappointed in Mary.

So it was in a timid voice that Mary wished her usual good-morrow,
and her heart sank within her a little, when Job, with a form of
civility, bade her welcome in that dwelling, where, until now, she
had been too well assured to require to be asked to sit down.

She took a chair. Margaret continued silent.

"I'm come to speak to you about this--about Jem Wilson."

"It's a bad business, I'm afeared," replied Job, sadly.

"Ay, it's bad enough anyhow. But Jem's innocent. Indeed he is; I'm as
sure as sure can be."

"How can you know, wench? Facts bear strong again him, poor fellow,
though he'd a deal to put him up, and aggravate him, they say. Ay,
poor lad, he's done for himself, I'm afeared."

"Job!" said Mary, rising from her chair in her eagerness, "you must
not say he did it. He didn't; I'm sure and certain he didn't. Oh! why
do you shake your head? Who is to believe me,--who is to think him
innocent, if you, who know'd him so well, stick to it he's guilty?"

"I'm loth enough to do it, lass," replied Job; "but I think he's
been ill used, and--jilted (that's plain truth, Mary, hard as it may
seem), and his blood has been up--many a man has done the like afore,
from like causes."

"Oh, God! Then you won't help me, Job, to prove him innocent? Oh!
Job, Job; believe me, Jem never did harm to no one."

"Not afore;--and mind, wench! I don't over-blame him for this." Job
relapsed into silence.

Mary thought a moment.

"Well, Job, you'll not refuse me this, I know. I won't mind what you
think, if you'll help me as if he was innocent. Now suppose I know--I
knew he was innocent,--it's only supposing, Job,--what must I do to
prove it? Tell me, Job! Isn't it called an _alibi_, the getting folk
to swear to where he really was at the time?"

"Best way, if you know'd him innocent, would be to find out the real
murderer. Some one did it, that's clear enough. If it wasn't Jem, who
was it?"

"How can I tell?" answered Mary, in an agony of terror, lest Job's
question was prompted by any suspicion of the truth.

But he was far enough from any such thought. Indeed, he had no doubt
in his own mind that Jem had, in some passionate moment, urged on by
slighted love and jealousy, been the murderer. And he was strongly
inclined to believe, that Mary was aware of this, only that, too
late repentant of her light conduct which had led to such fatal
consequences, she was now most anxious to save her old play-fellow,
her early friend, from the doom awaiting the shedder of blood.

"If Jem's not done it, I don't see as any on us can tell who did. We
might find out something if we'd time; but they say he's to be tried
on Tuesday. It's no use hiding it, Mary; things looks strong against
him."

"I know they do! I know they do! But, oh! Job! isn't an _alibi_ a
proving where he really was at th' time of the murder; and how must
I set about an _alibi_?"

"An _alibi_ is that, sure enough." He thought a little. "You mun ask
his mother his doings, and his whereabouts that night; the knowledge
of that will guide you a bit."

For he was anxious that on another should fall the task of
enlightening Mary on the hopelessness of the case, and he felt that
her own sense would be more convinced by inquiry and examination than
any mere assertion of his.

Margaret had sat silent and grave all this time. To tell the truth,
she was surprised and disappointed by the disclosure of Mary's
conduct, with regard to Mr. Henry Carson. Gentle, reserved, and
prudent herself, never exposed to the trial of being admired for her
personal appearance, and unsusceptible enough to be in doubt even
yet, whether the fluttering, tender, infinitely-joyous feeling she
was for the first time experiencing, at sight, or sound, or thought
of Will Wilson, was love or not,--Margaret had no sympathy with the
temptations to which loveliness, vanity, ambition, or the desire of
being admired, exposes so many; no sympathy with flirting girls, in
short. Then, she had no idea of the strength of the conflict between
will and principle in some who were differently constituted from
herself. With her, to be convinced that an action was wrong, was
tantamount to a determination not to do so again; and she had little
or no difficulty in carrying out her determination. So she could not
understand how it was that Mary had acted wrongly, and had felt too
much ashamed, in spite of all internal sophistry, to speak of her
actions. Margaret considered herself deceived; felt aggrieved; and,
at the time of which I am now telling you, was strongly inclined to
give Mary up altogether, as a girl devoid of the modest proprieties
of her sex, and capable of gross duplicity, in speaking of one
lover as she had done of Jem, while she was encouraging another in
attentions, at best of a very doubtful character.

But now Margaret was drawn into the conversation. Suddenly it flashed
across Mary's mind, that the night of the murder was the very night,
or rather the same early morning, that Margaret had been with Alice.
She turned sharp round, with--

"Oh! Margaret, you can tell me; you were there when he came back that
night; were you not? No! you were not; but you were there not many
hours after. Did not you hear where he'd been? He was away the night
before, too, when Alice was first taken; when you were there for your
tea. Oh! where was he, Margaret?"

"I don't know," she answered. "Stay! I do remember something about
his keeping Will company, in his walk to Liverpool. I can't justly
say what it was, so much happened that night."

"I'll go to his mother's," said Mary, resolutely.

They neither of them spoke, either to advise or dissuade. Mary felt
she had no sympathy from them, and braced up her soul to act without
such loving aid of friendship. She knew that their advice would be
willingly given at her demand, and that was all she really required
for Jem's sake. Still her courage failed a little as she walked to
Jane Wilson's, alone in the world with her secret.

Jane Wilson's eyes were swelled with crying; and it was sad to
see the ravages which intense anxiety and sorrow had made on her
appearance in four-and-twenty hours. All night long she and Mrs.
Davenport had crooned over their sorrows, always recurring, like the
burden of an old song, to the dreadest sorrow of all, which was now
impending over Mrs. Wilson. She had grown--I hardly know what word to
use--but, something like proud of her martyrdom; she had grown to hug
her grief; to feel an excitement in her agony of anxiety about her
boy.

"So, Mary, you're here! Oh! Mary, lass! He's to be tried on Tuesday."

She fell to sobbing, in the convulsive breath-catching manner which
tells so of much previous weeping.

"Oh! Mrs. Wilson, don't take on so! We'll get him off, you'll see.
Don't fret; they can't prove him guilty!"

"But I tell thee they will," interrupted Mrs. Wilson, half-irritated
at the light way, as she considered it, in which Mary spoke; and a
little displeased that another could hope when she had almost brought
herself to find pleasure in despair.

"It may suit thee well," continued she, "to make light o' the misery
thou hast caused; but I shall lay his death at thy door, as long as
I live, and die I know he will; and all for what he never did--no, he
never did; my own blessed boy!"

She was too weak to be angry long; her wrath sank away to feeble
sobbing and worn-out moans.

Mary was most anxious to soothe her from any violence of either grief
or anger; she did so want her to be clear in her recollection; and,
besides, her tenderness was great towards Jem's mother. So she spoke
in a low gentle tone the loving sentences, which sound so broken
and powerless in repetition, and which yet have so much power when
accompanied with caressing looks and actions, fresh from the heart;
and the old woman insensibly gave herself up to the influence of
those sweet, loving blue eyes, those tears of sympathy, those words
of love and hope, and was lulled into a less morbid state of mind.

"And now, dear Mrs. Wilson, can you remember where he said he was
going on Thursday night? He was out when Alice was taken ill; and he
did not come home till early in the morning, or, to speak true, in
the night: did he?"

"Ay! he went out near upon five; he went out with Will; he said he
were going to set [45] him a part of the way, for Will were hot upon
walking to Liverpool, and wouldn't hearken to Jem's offer of lending
him five shilling for his fare. So the two lads set off together. I
mind it all now; but, thou seest, Alice's illness, and this business
of poor Jem's, drove it out of my head; they went off together, to
walk to Liverpool; that's to say, Jem were to go a part o' th' way.
But, who knows" (falling back into the old desponding tone) "if he
really went? He might be led off on the road. Oh! Mary, wench!
they'll hang him for what he's never done."


   [Footnote 45: "To set," to accompany.]


"No, they won't--they shan't! I see my way a bit now. We mun get Will
to help; there'll be time. He can swear that Jem were with him. Where
is Jem?"

"Folk said he were taken to Kirkdale, i' th' prison-van, this
morning; without my seeing him, poor chap! Oh! wench! but they've
hurried on the business at a cruel rate."

"Ay! they've not let grass grow under their feet, in hunting out the
man that did it," said Mary, sorrowfully and bitterly. "But keep up
your heart. They got on the wrong scent when they took to suspecting
Jem. Don't be afeard. You'll see it will end right for Jem."

"I should mind it less if I could do aught," said Jane Wilson; "but
I'm such a poor weak old body, and my head's so gone, and I'm so
dazed-like, what with Alice and all, that I think and think, and can
do nought to help my child. I might ha' gone and seen him last night,
they tell me now, and then I missed it. Oh! Mary, I missed it; and I
may never see the lad again."

She looked so piteously in Mary's face with her miserable eyes, that
Mary felt her heart giving way, and, dreading the weakening of her
powers, which the burst of crying she longed for would occasion,
hastily changed the subject to Alice; and Jane, in her heart, feeling
that there was no sorrow like a mother's sorrow, replied,

"She keeps on much the same, thank you. She's happy, for she knows
nought of what's going on; but th' doctor says she grows weaker and
weaker. Thou'lt may be like to see her?"

Mary went up-stairs: partly because it is the etiquette in humble
life to offer to friends a last opportunity of seeing the dying
or the dead, while the same etiquette forbids a refusal of the
invitation; and partly because she longed to breathe, for an instant,
the atmosphere of holy calm, which seemed ever to surround the pious
good old woman. Alice lay, as before, without pain, or at least any
outward expression of it; but totally unconscious of all present
circumstances, and absorbed in recollections of the days of her
girlhood, which were vivid enough to take the place of realities to
her. Still she talked of green fields, and still she spoke to the
long-dead mother and sister, low-lying in their graves this many a
year, as if they were with her and about her, in the pleasant places
where her youth had passed.

But the voice was fainter, the motions were more languid; she was
evidently passing away; but _how_ happily!

Mary stood for a time in silence, watching and listening. Then she
bent down and reverently kissed Alice's cheek; and drawing Jane
Wilson away from the bed, as if the spirit of her who lay there were
yet cognisant of present realities, she whispered a few words of hope
to the poor mother, and kissing her over and over again in a warm,
loving manner, she bade her good-bye, went a few steps, and then once
more came back to bid her keep up her heart.

And when she had fairly left the house, Jane Wilson felt as if a
sun-beam had ceased shining into the room.

Yet oh! how sorely Mary's heart ached; for more and more the fell
certainty came on her that her father was the murderer! She struggled
hard not to dwell on this conviction; to think alone on the means of
proving Jem's innocence; that was her first duty, and that should be
done.




CHAPTER XXIII.

THE SUB-POENA.


   "And must it then depend on this poor eye
   And this unsteady hand, whether the bark,
   That bears my all of treasured hope and love,
   Shall find a passage through these frowning rocks
   To some fair port where peace and safety smile,--
   Or whether it shall blindly dash against them,
   And miserably sink? Heaven be my help;
   And clear my eye, and nerve my trembling hand!"

   "THE CONSTANT WOMAN."


Her heart beating, her head full of ideas, which required time and
solitude to be reduced into order, Mary hurried home. She was like
one who finds a jewel of which he cannot all at once ascertain the
value, but who hides his treasure until some quiet hour when he may
ponder over the capabilities its possession unfolds. She was like one
who discovers the silken clue which guides to some bower of bliss,
and secure of the power within his grasp, has to wait for a time
before he may tread the labyrinth.

But no jewel, no bower of bliss was ever so precious to miser or
lover as was the belief which now pervaded Mary's mind, that Jem's
innocence might be proved, without involving any suspicion of that
other--that dear one, so dear, although so criminal--on whose part in
this cruel business she dared not dwell even in thought. For if she
did, there arose the awful question,--if all went against Jem the
innocent, if judge and jury gave the verdict forth which had the
looming gallows in the rear, what ought she to do, possessed of her
terrible knowledge? Surely not to inculpate her father--and yet--and
yet--she almost prayed for the blessed unconsciousness of death or
madness, rather than that awful question should have to be answered
by her.

But now a way seemed opening, opening yet more clear. She was
thankful she had thought of the _alibi_, and yet more thankful to
have so easily obtained the clue to Jem's whereabouts that miserable
night. The bright light that her new hope threw over all seemed also
to make her thankful for the early time appointed for the trial. It
would be easy to catch Will Wilson on his return from the Isle of
Man, which he had planned should be on the Monday; and on the Tuesday
all would be made clear--all that she dared to wish to be made clear.

She had still to collect her thoughts and freshen her memory enough
to arrange how to meet with Will--for to the chances of a letter she
would not trust; to find out his lodgings when in Liverpool; to try
and remember the name of the ship in which he was to sail: and the
more she considered these points the more difficulty she found there
would be in ascertaining these minor but important facts. For you are
aware that Alice, whose memory was clear and strong on all points in
which her heart was interested, was lying in a manner senseless: that
Jane Wilson was (to use her own word, so expressive to a Lancashire
ear) "dazed," that is to say, bewildered, lost in the confusion of
terrifying and distressing thoughts; incapable of concentrating her
mind; and at the best of times Will's proceedings were a matter of
little importance to her (or so she pretended), she was so jealous of
aught which distracted attention from her pearl of price, her only
son Jem. So Mary felt hopeless of obtaining any intelligence of the
sailor's arrangements from her.

Then, should she apply to Jem himself? No! she knew him too well.
She felt how thoroughly he must ere now have had it in his power to
exculpate himself at another's expense. And his tacit refusal so to
do had assured her of what she had never doubted, that the murderer
was safe from any impeachment of his. But then neither would he
consent, she feared, to any steps which might tend to prove himself
innocent. At any rate, she could not consult him. He was removed to
Kirkdale, and time pressed. Already it was Saturday at noon. And even
if she could have gone to him, I believe she would not. She longed to
do all herself; to be his liberator, his deliverer; to win him life,
though she might never regain his lost love, by her own exertions.
And oh! how could she see him to discuss a subject in which both
knew who was the blood-stained man; and yet whose name might not be
breathed by either, so dearly with all his faults, his sins, was he
loved by both.

All at once, when she had ceased to try and remember, the name of
Will's ship flashed across her mind.

The _John Cropper_.

He had named it, she had been sure, all along. He had named it in his
conversation with her that last, that fatal Thursday evening. She
repeated it over and over again, through a nervous dread of again
forgetting it. The _John Cropper_.

And then, as if she were rousing herself out of some strange stupor,
she bethought her of Margaret. Who so likely as Margaret to treasure
every little particular respecting Will, now Alice was dead to all
the stirring purposes of life?

She had gone thus far in her process of thought, when a neighbour
stepped in; she with whom they had usually deposited the house-key,
when both Mary and her father were absent from home, and who
consequently took upon herself to answer all inquiries, and receive
all messages which any friends might make, or leave, on finding the
house shut up.

"Here's somewhat for you, Mary! A policeman left it."

A bit of parchment.

Many people have a dread of those mysterious pieces of parchment.
I am one. Mary was another. Her heart misgave her as she took it,
and looked at the unusual appearance of the writing, which, though
legible enough, conveyed no idea to her, or rather her mind shut
itself up against receiving any idea, which after all was rather a
proof she had some suspicion of the meaning that awaited her.

"What is it?" asked she, in a voice from which all the pith and
marrow of strength seemed extracted.

"Nay! how should I know? Policeman said he'd call again towards
evening, and see if you'd getten it. He were loth to leave it, though
I telled him who I was, and all about my keeping th' key, and taking
messages."

"What is it about?" asked Mary again, in the same hoarse, feeble
voice, and turning it over in her fingers, as if she dreaded to
inform herself of its meaning.

"Well! yo can read word of writing and I cannot, so it's queer I
should have to tell you. But my master says it's a summons for yo to
bear witness again Jem Wilson, at th' trial at Liverpool Assize."

"God pity me!" said Mary, faintly, as white as a sheet.

"Nay, wench, never take on so. What yo can say will go little way
either to help or to hinder, for folk say he's certain to be hung;
and sure enough it was t'other one as was your sweetheart."

But Mary was beyond any pang this speech would have given at another
time. Her thoughts were all busy picturing to herself the terrible
occasion of their next meeting--not as lovers meet should they meet!

"Well!" said the neighbour, seeing no use in remaining with one who
noticed her words or her presence so little; "thou'lt tell policeman
thou'st getten his precious bit of paper. He seemed to think I should
be keeping it for mysel; he's th' first as has ever misdoubted me
about giving messages, or notes. Good day."

She left the house, but Mary did not know it. She sat still with the
parchment in her hand.

All at once she started up. She would take it to Job Legh and ask him
to tell her the true meaning, for it could not be _that_.

So she went, and choked out her words of inquiry.

"It's a sub-poena," he replied, turning the parchment over with the
air of a connoisseur; for Job loved hard words, and lawyer-like
forms, and even esteemed himself slightly qualified for a lawyer,
from the smattering of knowledge he had picked up from an odd volume
of Blackstone that he had once purchased at a book-stall.

"A sub-poena--what is that?" gasped Mary, still in suspense.

Job was struck with her voice, her changed, miserable voice, and
peered at her countenance from over his spectacles.

"A sub-poena is neither more nor less than this, my dear. It's a
summonsing you to attend, and answer such questions as may be asked
of you regarding the trial of James Wilson, for the murder of Henry
Carson; that's the long and short of it, only more elegantly put, for
the benefit of them who knows how to value the gift of language. I've
been a witness before-time myself; there's nothing much to be afeared
on; if they are impudent, why, just you be impudent, and give 'em tit
for tat."

"Nothing much to be afeared on!" echoed Mary, but in such a different
tone.

"Ay, poor wench, I see how it is. It'll go hard with thee a bit, I
dare say; but keep up thy heart. Yo cannot have much to tell 'em,
that can go either one way or th' other. Nay! may be thou may do
him a bit o' good, for when they set eyes on thee, they'll see fast
enough how he came to be so led away by jealousy; for thou'rt a
pretty creature, Mary, and one look at thy face will let 'em into th'
secret of a young man's madness, and make 'em more ready to pass it
over."

"Oh! Job, and won't you ever believe me when I tell you he's
innocent? Indeed, and indeed I can prove it; he was with Will all
that night; he was, indeed, Job!"

"My wench! whose word hast thou for that?" said Job, pityingly.

"Why! his mother told me, and I'll get Will to bear witness to it.
But, oh! Job" (bursting into tears), "it is hard if you won't believe
me. How shall I clear him to strangers, when those who know him, and
ought to love him, are so set against his being innocent?"

"God knows, I'm not against his being innocent," said Job, solemnly.
"I'd give half my remaining days on earth,--I'd give them all, Mary
(and but for the love I bear to my poor blind girl, they'd be no
great gift), if I could save him. You've thought me hard, Mary, but
I'm not hard at bottom, and I'll help you if I can; that I will,
right or wrong," he added; but in a low voice, and coughed the
uncertain words away the moment afterwards.

"Oh, Job! if you will help me," exclaimed Mary, brightening up
(though it was but a wintry gleam after all), "tell me what to say,
when they question me; I shall be so gloppened, [46] I shan't know
what to answer."


   [Footnote 46: "Gloppened," terrified.]


"Thou canst do nought better than tell the truth. Truth's best at
all times, they say; and for sure it is when folk have to do with
lawyers; for they're 'cute and cunning enough to get it out sooner or
later, and it makes folk look like Tom Noddies, when truth follows
falsehood, against their will."

"But I don't know the truth; I mean--I can't say rightly what I mean;
but I'm sure, if I were pent up, and stared at by hundreds of folk,
and asked ever so simple a question, I should be for answering
it wrong; if they asked me if I had seen you on a Saturday, or a
Tuesday, or any day, I should have clean forgotten all about it, and
say the very thing I should not."

"Well, well, don't go for to get such notions into your head; they're
what they call 'narvous,' and talking on 'em does no good. Here's
Margaret! bless the wench! Look, Mary, how well she guides hersel."

Job fell to watching his grand-daughter, as with balancing, measured
steps, timed almost as if to music, she made her way across the
street.

Mary shrank as if from a cold blast--shrank from Margaret! The blind
girl, with her reserve, her silence, seemed to be a severe judge;
she, listening, would be such a check to the trusting earnestness of
confidence, which was beginning to unlock the sympathy of Job. Mary
knew herself to blame; felt her errors in every fibre of her heart;
but yet she would rather have had them spoken about, even in terms of
severest censure, than have been treated in the icy manner in which
Margaret had received her that morning.

"Here's Mary," said Job, almost as if he wished to propitiate his
grand-daughter, "come to take a bit of dinner with us, for I'll
warrant she's never thought of cooking any for herself to-day; and
she looks as wan and pale as a ghost."

It was calling out the feeling of hospitality, so strong and warm in
most of those who have little to offer, but whose heart goes eagerly
and kindly with that little. Margaret came towards Mary with a
welcoming gesture, and a kinder manner by far than she had used in
the morning.

"Nay, Mary, thou know'st thou'st getten nought at home," urged Job.

And Mary, faint and weary, and with a heart too aching-full of other
matters to be pertinacious in this, withdrew her refusal.

They ate their dinner quietly; for to all it was an effort to speak,
and after one or two attempts they had subsided into silence.

When the meal was ended Job began again on the subject they all had
at heart.

"Yon poor lad at Kirkdale will want a lawyer to see they don't put on
him, but do him justice. Hast thought of that?"

Mary had not, and felt sure his mother had not.

Margaret confirmed this last supposition.

"I've but just been there, and poor Jane is like one dateless; so
many griefs come on her at once. One time she seems to make sure
he'll be hung; and if I took her in that way, she flew out (poor
body!) and said, that in spite of what folk said, there were them as
could, and would prove him guiltless. So I never knew where to have
her. The only thing she was constant in, was declaring him innocent."

"Mother-like!" said Job.

"She meant Will, when she spoke of them that could prove him
innocent. He was with Will on Thursday night, walking a part of the
way with him to Liverpool; now the thing is to lay hold on Will and
get him to prove this." So spoke Mary, calm, from the earnestness of
her purpose.

"Don't build too much on it, my dear," said Job.

"I do build on it," replied Mary, "because I know it's the truth, and
I mean to try and prove it, come what may. Nothing you can say will
daunt me, Job, so don't you go and try. You may help, but you cannot
hinder me doing what I'm resolved on."

They respected her firmness of determination, and Job almost gave
in to her belief, when he saw how steadfastly she was acting upon
it. Oh! surest way of conversion to our faith, whatever it may
be,--regarding either small things, or great,--when it is beheld as
the actuating principle, from which we never swerve! When it is seen
that, instead of over-much profession, it is worked into the life,
and moves every action!

Mary gained courage as she instinctively felt she had made way with
one at least of her companions.

"Now I'm clear about this much," she continued, "he was with Will
when the--shot was fired (she could not bring herself to say, when
the murder was committed, when she remembered _who_ it was that, she
had every reason to believe, was the taker-away of life). Will can
prove this. I must find Will. He wasn't to sail till Tuesday. There's
time enough. He was to come back from his uncle's, in the Isle of
Man, on Monday. I must meet him in Liverpool, on that day, and tell
him what has happened, and how poor Jem is in trouble, and that he
must prove an _alibi_, come Tuesday. All this I can and will do,
though perhaps I don't clearly know how, just at present. But surely
God will help me. When I know I'm doing right, I will have no fear,
but put my trust in Him; for I'm acting for the innocent and good,
and not for my own self, who have done so wrong. I have no fear when
I think of Jem, who is so good."

She stopped, oppressed with the fulness of her heart. Margaret began
to love her again; to see in her the same sweet, faulty, impulsive,
lovable creature she had known in the former Mary Barton, but with
more of dignity, self-reliance, and purpose.

Mary spoke again.

"Now I know the name of Will's vessel--the _John Cropper_; and I
know that she is bound to America. That is something to know. But
I forget, if I ever heard, where he lodges in Liverpool. He spoke of
his landlady, as a good, trustworthy woman; but if he named her name,
it has slipped my memory. Can you help me, Margaret?"

She appealed to her friend calmly and openly, as if perfectly aware
of, and recognising the unspoken tie which bound her and Will
together; she asked her in the same manner in which she would have
asked a wife where her husband dwelt. And Margaret replied in the
like calm tone, two spots of crimson on her cheeks alone bearing
witness to any internal agitation.

"He lodges at a Mrs. Jones's, Milk-House Yard, out of Nicholas
Street. He has lodged there ever since he began to go to sea; she is
a very decent kind of woman, I believe."

"Well, Mary! I'll give you my prayers," said Job. "It's not often
I pray regular, though I often speak a word to God, when I'm either
very happy or very sorry; I've catched myself thanking Him at odd
hours when I've found a rare insect, or had a fine day for an
out; but I cannot help it, no more than I can talking to a friend.
But this time I'll pray regular for Jem, and for you. And so will
Margaret, I'll be bound. Still, wench! what think yo of a lawyer? I
know one, Mr. Cheshire, who's rather given to th' insect line--and a
good kind o' chap. He and I have swopped specimens many's the time,
when either of us had a duplicate. He'll do me a kind turn, I'm sure.
I'll just take my hat, and pay him a visit."

No sooner said, than done.

Margaret and Mary were left alone. And this seemed to bring back the
feeling of awkwardness, not to say estrangement.

But Mary, excited to an unusual pitch of courage, was the first to
break silence.

"Oh, Margaret!" said she, "I see--I feel how wrong you think I have
acted; you cannot think me worse than I think myself, now my eyes are
opened." Here her sobs came choking up her voice.

"Nay," Margaret began, "I have no right to--"

"Yes, Margaret, you have a right to judge; you cannot help it; only
in your judgment remember mercy, as the Bible says. You, who have
been always good, cannot tell how easy it is at first to go a little
wrong, and then how hard it is to go back. Oh! I little thought when
I was first pleased with Mr. Carson's speeches, how it would all end;
perhaps in the death of him I love better than life."

She burst into a passion of tears. The feelings pent up through the
day would have vent. But checking herself with a strong effort, and
looking up at Margaret as piteously as if those calm, stony eyes
could see her imploring face, she added,

"I must not cry; I must not give way; there will be time enough
for that hereafter, if--I only wanted you to speak kindly to me,
Margaret, for I am very, very wretched; more wretched than any
one can ever know; more wretched, I sometimes fancy, than I have
deserved,--but that's wrong, isn't it, Margaret? Oh! I have done
wrong, and I am punished; you cannot tell how much."

Who could resist her voice, her tones of misery, of humility? Who
would refuse the kindness for which she begged so penitently? Not
Margaret. The old friendly manner came back. With it, may be, more of
tenderness.

"Oh! Margaret, do you think he can be saved; do you think they can
find him guilty if Will comes forward as a witness? Won't that be a
good _alibi_?"

Margaret did not answer for a moment.

"Oh, speak! Margaret," said Mary, with anxious impatience.

"I know nought about law, or _alibis_," replied Margaret, meekly;
"but, Mary, as grandfather says, aren't you building too much on
what Jane Wilson has told you about his going with Will? Poor soul,
she's gone dateless, I think, with care, and watching, and over-much
trouble; and who can wonder? Or Jem may have told her he was going,
by way of a blind."

"You don't know Jem," said Mary, starting from her seat in a hurried
manner, "or you would not say so."

"I hope I may be wrong; but think, Mary, how much there is against
him. The shot was fired with his gun; he it was as threatened Mr.
Carson not many days before; he was absent from home at that very
time, as we know, and, as I'm much afeared, some one will be called
on to prove; and there's no one else to share suspicion with him."

Mary heaved a deep sigh.

"But, Margaret, he did not do it," Mary again asserted.

Margaret looked unconvinced.

"I can do no good, I see, by saying so, for none on you believe me,
and I won't say so again till I can prove it. Monday morning I'll go
to Liverpool. I shall be at hand for the trial. Oh dear! dear! And I
will find Will; and then, Margaret, I think you'll be sorry for being
so stubborn about Jem."

"Don't fly off, dear Mary; I'd give a deal to be wrong. And now I'm
going to be plain spoken. You'll want money. Them lawyers is no
better than a spunge for sucking up money; let alone your hunting out
Will, and your keep in Liverpool, and what not. You must take some of
the mint I've got laid by in the old tea-pot. You have no right to
refuse, for I offer it to Jem, not to you; it's for his purposes
you're to use it."

"I know--I see. Thank you, Margaret; you're a kind one, at any
rate. I take it for Jem; and I'll do my very best with it for him.
Not all, though; don't think I'll take all. They'll pay me for my
keep. I'll take this," accepting a sovereign from the hoard which
Margaret produced out of its accustomed place in the cupboard. "Your
grandfather will pay the lawyer. I'll have nought to do with him,"
shuddering as she remembered Job's words, about lawyers' skill in
always discovering the truth, sooner or later; and knowing what was
the secret she had to hide.

"Bless you! don't make such ado about it," said Margaret, cutting
short Mary's thanks. "I sometimes think there's two sides to the
commandment; and that we may say, 'Let others do unto you, as you
would do unto them,' for pride often prevents our giving others a
great deal of pleasure, in not letting them be kind, when their
hearts are longing to help; and when we ourselves should wish to do
just the same, if we were in their place. Oh! how often I've been
hurt, by being coldly told by persons not to trouble myself about
their care, or sorrow, when I saw them in great grief, and wanted to
be of comfort. Our Lord Jesus was not above letting folk minister to
Him, for He knew how happy it makes one to do aught for another. It's
the happiest work on earth."

Mary had been too much engrossed by watching what was passing in the
street to attend very closely to that which Margaret was saying. From
her seat she could see out of the window pretty plainly, and she
caught sight of a gentleman walking alongside of Job, evidently in
earnest conversation with him, and looking keen and penetrating
enough to be a lawyer. Job was laying down something to be attended
to she could see, by his up-lifted fore-finger, and his whole
gesture; then he pointed and nodded across the street to his own
house, as if inducing his companion to come in. Mary dreaded lest he
should, and she be subjected to a closer cross-examination than she
had hitherto undergone, as to why she was so certain that Jem was
innocent. She feared he was coming; he stepped a little towards the
spot. No! it was only to make way for a child, tottering along, whom
Mary had overlooked. Now Job took him by the button, so earnestly
familiar had he grown. The gentleman looked "fidging fain" to be
gone, but submitted in a manner that made Mary like him in spite
of his profession. Then came a volley of last words, answered by
briefest nods, and monosyllables; and then the stranger went off with
redoubled quickness of pace, and Job crossed the street with a little
satisfied air of importance on his kindly face.

"Well! Mary," said he on entering, "I've seen the lawyer, not Mr.
Cheshire though; trials for murder, it seems, are not his line o'
business. But he gived me a note to another 'torney; a fine fellow
enough, only too much of a talker; I could hardly get a word in, he
cut me so short. However, I've just been going over the principal
points again to him; may be you saw us? I wanted him just to come
over and speak to you himsel, Mary, but he was pressed for time; and
he said your evidence would not be much either here or there. He's
going to the 'sizes first train on Monday morning, and will see Jem,
and hear the ins and outs from him, and he's gived me his address,
Mary, and you and Will are to call on him (Will 'special) on Monday
at two o'clock. Thou'rt taking it in, Mary; thou'rt to call on him in
Liverpool at two, Monday afternoon?"

Job had reason to doubt if she fully understood him; for all this
minuteness of detail, these satisfactory arrangements, as he
considered them, only seemed to bring the circumstances in which she
was placed more vividly home to Mary. They convinced her that it was
real, and not all a dream, as she had sunk into fancying it for a
few minutes, while sitting in the old accustomed place, her body
enjoying the rest, and her frame sustained by food, and listening to
Margaret's calm voice. The gentleman she had just beheld would see
and question Jem in a few hours, and what would be the result?

Monday: that was the day after to-morrow, and on Tuesday, life and
death would be tremendous realities to her lover; or else death would
be an awful certainty to her father.

No wonder Job went over his main points again:--

"Monday; at two o'clock, mind; and here's his card. 'Mr. Bridgenorth,
41, Renshaw Street, Liverpool.' He'll be lodging there."

Job ceased talking, and the silence roused Mary up to thank him.

"You're very kind, Job; very. You and Margaret won't desert me, come
what will."

"Pooh! pooh! wench; don't lose heart, just as I'm beginning to get
it. He seems to think a deal on Will's evidence. You're sure, girls,
you're under no mistake about Will?"

"I'm sure," said Mary, "he went straight from here, purposing to go
see his uncle at the Isle of Man, and be back Sunday night, ready for
the ship sailing on Tuesday."

"So am I," said Margaret. "And the ship's name was the _John
Cropper_, and he lodged where I told Mary before. Have you got it
down, Mary?" Mary wrote it on the back of Mr. Bridgenorth's card.

"He was not over-willing to go," said she, as she wrote, "for he knew
little about his uncle, and said he didn't care if he never knowed
more. But he said kinsfolk was kinsfolk, and promises was promises,
so he'd go for a day or so, and then it would be over."

Margaret had to go and practise some singing in town; so, though loth
to depart and be alone, Mary bade her friends good-bye.




CHAPTER XXIV.

WITH THE DYING.


   "O sad and solemn is the trembling watch
   Of those who sit and count the heavy hours,
   Beside the fevered sleep of one they love!
   O awful is it in the hushed mid night,
   While gazing on the pallid, moveless form,
   To start and ask, 'Is it now sleep--or death?'"

   ANONYMOUS.


Mary could not be patient in her loneliness; so much painful thought
weighed on her mind; the very house was haunted with memories and
foreshadowings.

Having performed all duties to Jem, as far as her weak powers,
yet loving heart could act; and a black veil being drawn over her
father's past, present, and future life, beyond which she could not
penetrate to judge of any filial service she ought to render; her
mind unconsciously sought after some course of action in which
she might engage. Any thing, any thing, rather than leisure for
reflection.

And then came up the old feeling which first bound Ruth to Naomi; the
love they both held towards one object; and Mary felt that her cares
would be most lightened by being of use, or of comfort to his mother.
So she once more locked up the house, and set off towards Ancoats;
rushing along with down-cast head, for fear lest any one should
recognise her and arrest her progress.

Jane Wilson sat quietly in her chair as Mary entered; so quietly, as
to strike one by the contrast it presented to her usual bustling and
nervous manner.

She looked very pale and wan; but the quietness was the thing that
struck Mary most. She did not rise as Mary came in, but sat still and
said something in so gentle, so feeble a voice, that Mary did not
catch it.

Mrs. Davenport, who was there, plucked Mary by the gown, and
whispered,

"Never heed her; she's worn out, and best let alone. I'll tell you
all about it, up-stairs."

But Mary, touched by the anxious look with which Mrs. Wilson gazed
at her, as if awaiting the answer to some question, went forward to
listen to the speech she was again repeating.

"What is this? will you tell me?"

Then Mary looked and saw another ominous slip of parchment in the
mother's hand, which she was rolling up and down in a tremulous
manner between her fingers.

Mary's heart sickened within her, and she could not speak.

"What is it?" she repeated. "Will you tell me?" She still looked at
Mary, with the same child-like gaze of wonder and patient entreaty.

What could she answer?

"I telled ye not to heed her," said Mrs. Davenport, a little angrily.
"She knows well enough what it is,--too well, belike. I was not
in when they sarved it; but Mrs. Heming (her as lives next door)
was, and she spelled out the meaning, and made it all clear to Mrs.
Wilson. It's a summons to be a witness on Jem's trial--Mrs. Heming
thinks, to swear to the gun; for, yo see, there's nobbut [47] her
as can testify to its being his, and she let on so easily to the
policeman that it was his, that there's no getting off her word now.
Poor body; she takes it very hard, I dare say!"


   [Footnote 47: "Nobbut," none-but.
                 "No man sigh evere God _no but_ the oon bigetun
                 sone."--_Wiclif's Version._]


Mrs. Wilson had waited patiently while this whispered speech was
being uttered, imagining, perhaps, that it would end in some
explanation addressed to her. But when both were silent, though
their eyes, without speech or language, told their hearts' pity, she
spoke again in the same unaltered gentle voice (so different from
the irritable impatience she had been ever apt to show to every
one except her husband,--he who had wedded her, broken-down and
injured)--in a voice so different, I say, from the old, hasty manner,
she spoke now the same anxious words,

"What is this? Will you tell me?"

"Yo'd better give it me at once, Mrs. Wilson, and let me put it out
of your sight.--Speak to her, Mary, wench, and ask for a sight on it;
I've tried, and better-tried to get it from her, and she takes no
heed of words, and I'm loth to pull it by force out of her hands."

Mary drew the little "cricket" [48] out from under the dresser, and
sat down at Mrs. Wilson's knee, and, coaxing one of her tremulous,
ever-moving hands into hers, began to rub it soothingly; there was a
little resistance--a very little, but that was all; and presently, in
the nervous movement of the imprisoned hand, the parchment fell to
the ground.


   [Footnote 48 "Cricket," a stool.]


Mary calmly and openly picked it up without any attempt at
concealment, and quietly placing it in sight of the anxious eyes
that followed it with a kind of spell-bound dread, went on with her
soothing caresses.

"She has had no sleep for many nights," said the girl to Mrs.
Davenport, "and all this woe and sorrow,--it's no wonder."

"No, indeed!" Mrs. Davenport answered.

"We must get her fairly to bed; we must get her undressed, and all;
and trust to God, in His mercy, to send her to sleep, or else,--"

For, you see, they spoke before her as if she were not there; her
heart was so far away.

Accordingly they almost lifted her from the chair in which she sat
motionless, and taking her up as gently as a mother carries her
sleeping baby, they undressed her poor, worn form, and laid her in
the little bed up-stairs. They had once thought of placing her in
Jem's bed, to be out of sight or sound of any disturbance of Alice's,
but then again they remembered the shock she might receive in
awakening in so unusual a place, and also that Mary, who intended
to keep vigil that night in the house of mourning, would find it
difficult to divide her attention in the possible cases that might
ensue.

So they laid her, as I said before, on that little pallet-bed; and,
as they were slowly withdrawing from the bed-side, hoping and praying
that she might sleep, and forget for a time her heavy burden, she
looked wistfully after Mary, and whispered,

"You haven't told me what it is. What is it?"

And gazing in her face for the expected answer, her eye-lids slowly
closed, and she fell into a deep, heavy sleep, almost as profound a
rest as death.

Mrs. Davenport went her way, and Mary was alone,--for I cannot call
those who sleep allies against the agony of thought which solitude
sometimes brings up.

She dreaded the night before her. Alice might die; the doctor had
that day declared her case hopeless, and not far from death; and
at times the terror, so natural to the young, not of death, but of
the remains of the dead, came over Mary; and she bent and listened
anxiously for the long-drawn, pausing breath of the sleeping Alice.

Or Mrs. Wilson might awake in a state which Mary dreaded to
anticipate, and anticipated while she dreaded;--in a state of
complete delirium. Already her senses had been severely stunned by
the full explanation of what was required of her,--of what she had
to prove against her son, her Jem, her only child,--which Mary could
not doubt the officious Mrs. Heming had given; and what if in dreams
(that land into which no sympathy or love can penetrate with another,
either to share its bliss or its agony,--that land whose scenes are
unspeakable terrors, are hidden mysteries, are priceless treasures to
one alone,--that land where alone I may see, while yet I tarry here,
the sweet looks of my dead child),--what if, in the horrors of her
dreams, her brain should go still more astray, and she should waken
crazy with her visions, and the terrible reality that begot them?

How much worse is anticipation sometimes than reality! How Mary
dreaded that night, and how calmly it passed by! Even more so than if
Mary had not had such claims upon her care!

Anxiety about them deadened her own peculiar anxieties. She thought
of the sleepers whom she was watching, till overpowered herself by
the want of rest, she fell off into short slumbers in which the night
wore imperceptibly away. To be sure Alice spoke, and sang, during her
waking moments, like the child she deemed herself; but so happily
with the dearly-loved ones around her, with the scent of the heather,
and the song of the wild bird hovering about her in imagination--with
old scraps of ballads, or old snatches of primitive versions of the
Psalms (such as are sung in country churches half draperied over with
ivy, and where the running brook, or the murmuring wind among the
trees makes fit accompaniment to the chorus of human voices uttering
praise and thanksgiving to their God)--that the speech and the song
gave comfort and good cheer to the listener's heart, and the gray
dawn began to dim the light of the rush-candle, before Mary thought
it possible that day was already trembling on the horizon.

Then she got up from the chair where she had been dozing, and went,
half-asleep, to the window to assure herself that morning was at
hand. The streets were unusually quiet with a Sabbath stillness. No
factory bells that morning; no early workmen going to their labours;
no slip-shod girls cleaning the windows of the little shops which
broke the monotony of the street; instead, you might see here and
there some operative sallying forth for a breath of country air, or
some father leading out his wee toddling bairns for the unwonted
pleasure of a walk with "Daddy," in the clear frosty morning. Men
with more leisure on week-days would perhaps have walked quicker than
they did through the fresh sharp air of this Sunday morning; but to
them there was a pleasure, an absolute refreshment in the dawdling
gait they, one and all of them, had.

To be sure, there were one or two passengers on that morning whose
objects were less innocent and less praiseworthy than those of the
people I have already mentioned, and whose animal state of mind and
body clashed jarringly on the peacefulness of the day; but upon them
I will not dwell: as you and I, and almost every one, I think, may
send up our individual cry of self-reproach that we have not done all
that we could for the stray and wandering ones of our brethren.

When Mary turned from the window, she went to the bed of each
sleeper, to look and listen. Alice looked perfectly quiet and happy
in her slumber, and her face seemed to have become much more youthful
during her painless approach to death.

Mrs. Wilson's countenance was stamped with the anxiety of the last
few days, although she, too, appeared sleeping soundly; but as Mary
gazed on her, trying to trace a likeness to her son in her face,
she awoke and looked up into Mary's eyes, while the expression of
consciousness came back into her own.

Both were silent for a minute or two. Mary's eyes had fallen beneath
that penetrating gaze, in which the agony of memory seemed every
moment to find fuller vent.

"Is it a dream?" the mother asked at last in a low voice.

"No!" replied Mary, in the same tone.

Mrs. Wilson hid her face in the pillow.

She was fully conscious of every thing this morning; it was evident
that the stunning effect of the subpoena, which had affected her so
much last night in her weak, worn-out state, had passed away. Mary
offered no opposition when she indicated by languid gesture and
action that she wished to rise. A sleepless bed is a haunted place.

When she was dressed with Mary's help, she stood by Alice for a
minute or two, looking at the slumberer.

"How happy she is!" said she, quietly and sadly.

All the time that Mary was getting breakfast ready, and performing
every other little domestic office she could think of, to add to
the comfort of Jem's mother, Mrs. Wilson sat still in the arm-chair,
watching her silently. Her old irritation of temper and manner seemed
to have suddenly disappeared, or perhaps she was too depressed in
body and mind to show it.

Mary told her all that had been done with regard to Mr. Bridgenorth;
all her own plans for seeking out Will; all her hopes; and concealed
as well as she could all the doubts and fears that would arise
unbidden. To this Mrs. Wilson listened without much remark, but with
deep interest and perfect comprehension. When Mary ceased she sighed
and said, "Oh wench! I am his mother, and yet I do so little, I can
do so little! That's what frets me! I seem like a child as sees its
mammy ill, and moans and cries its little heart out, yet does nought
to help. I think my sense has left me all at once, and I can't even
find strength to cry like the little child."

Hereupon she broke into a feeble wail of self-reproach, that her
outward show of misery was not greater; as if any cries, or tears, or
loud-spoken words could have told of such pangs at the heart as that
look, and that thin, piping, altered voice!

But think of Mary and what she was enduring! Picture to yourself (for
I cannot tell you) the armies of thoughts that met and clashed in her
brain; and then imagine the effort it cost her to be calm, and quiet,
and even, in a faint way, cheerful and smiling at times.

After a while she began to stir about in her own mind for some means
of sparing the poor mother the trial of appearing as a witness in
the matter of the gun. She had made no allusion to her summons this
morning, and Mary almost thought she must have forgotten it; and
surely some means might be found to prevent that additional sorrow.
She must see Job about it; nay, if necessary, she must see Mr.
Bridgenorth, with all his truth-compelling powers; for, indeed, she
had so struggled and triumphed (though a sadly-bleeding victor at
heart) over herself these two last days, had so concealed agony,
and hidden her inward woe and bewilderment, that she began to take
confidence, and to have faith in her own powers of meeting any one
with a passably fair show, whatever might be rending her life beneath
the cloak of her deception.

Accordingly, as soon as Mrs. Davenport came in after morning church,
to ask after the two lone women, and she had heard the report Mary
had to give (so much better as regarded Mrs. Wilson than what they
had feared the night before it would have been)--as soon as this
kind-hearted, grateful woman came in, Mary, telling her her purpose,
went off to fetch the doctor who attended Alice.

He was shaking himself after his morning's round, and happy in the
anticipation of his Sunday's dinner; but he was a good-tempered man,
who found it difficult to keep down his jovial easiness even by the
bed of sickness or death. He had mischosen his profession; for it was
his delight to see every one around him in full enjoyment of life.

However, he subdued his face to the proper expression of sympathy,
befitting a doctor listening to a patient, or a patient's friend (and
Mary's sad, pale, anxious face might be taken for either the one or
the other).

"Well, my girl! and what brings you here?" said he, as he entered his
surgery. "Not on your own account, I hope."

"I wanted you to come and see Alice Wilson,--and then I thought you
would may be take a look at Mrs. Wilson."

He bustled on his hat and coat, and followed Mary instantly.

After shaking his head over Alice (as if it was a mournful thing for
one so pure and good, so true, although so humble a Christian, to
be nearing her desired haven), and muttering the accustomed words
intended to destroy hope, and prepare anticipation, he went in
compliance with Mary's look to ask the usual questions of Mrs.
Wilson, who sat passively in her arm-chair.

She answered his questions, and submitted to his examination.

"How do you think her?" asked Mary, eagerly.

"Why--a," began he, perceiving that he was desired to take one side
in his answer, and unable to find out whether his listener was
anxious for a favourable verdict or otherwise; but thinking it most
probable that she would desire the former, he continued,

"She is weak, certainly; the natural result of such a shock as the
arrest of her son would be,--for I understand this James Wilson, who
murdered Mr. Carson, was her son. Sad thing to have such a reprobate
in the family."

"You say '_who murdered_,' sir!" said Mary, indignantly. "He is only
taken up on suspicion, and many have no doubt of his innocence--those
who know him, sir."

"Ah, well, well! doctors have seldom time to read newspapers, and I
dare say I'm not very correct in my story. I dare say he's innocent;
I'm sure I had no right to say otherwise,--only words slip out.--No!
indeed, young woman, I see no cause for apprehension about this poor
creature in the next room;--weak--certainly; but a day or two's good
nursing will set her up, and I'm sure you're a good nurse, my dear,
from your pretty, kind-hearted face,--I'll send a couple of pills and
a draught, but don't alarm yourself,--there's no occasion, I assure
you."

"But you don't think her fit to go to Liverpool?" asked Mary, still
in the anxious tone of one who wishes earnestly for some particular
decision.

"To Liverpool--yes," replied he. "A short journey like that could
not fatigue, and might distract her thoughts. Let her go by all
means,--it would be the very thing for her."

"Oh, sir!" burst out Mary, almost sobbing; "I did so hope you would
say she was too ill to go."

"Whew--" said he, with a prolonged whistle, trying to understand the
case, but being, as he said, no reader of newspapers, utterly unaware
of the peculiar reasons there might be for so apparently unfeeling
a wish,--"Why did you not tell me so sooner? It might certainly do
her harm in her weak state; there is always some risk attending
journeys--draughts, and what not. To her, they might prove very
injurious,--very. I disapprove of journeys, or excitement, in all
cases where the patient is in the low, fluttered state in which Mrs.
Wilson is. If you take _my_ advice, you will certainly put a stop to
all thoughts of going to Liverpool." He really had completely changed
his opinion, though quite unconsciously; so desirous was he to comply
with the wishes of others.

"Oh, sir, thank you! And will you give me a certificate of her being
unable to go, if the lawyer says we must have one? The lawyer, you
know," continued she, seeing him look puzzled, "who is to defend
Jem,--it was as a witness against him--"

"My dear girl!" said he, almost angrily, "why did you not state the
case fully at first? one minute would have done it,--and my dinner
waiting all this time. To be sure she can't go,--it would be madness
to think of it; if her evidence could have done good, it would have
been a different thing. Come to me for the certificate any time;
that is to say, if the lawyer advises you. I second the lawyer; take
counsel with both the learned professions--ha, ha, ha,--"

And laughing at his own joke, he departed, leaving Mary accusing
herself of stupidity in having imagined that every one was as well
acquainted with the facts concerning the trial as she was herself;
for indeed she had never doubted that the doctor would have been
aware of the purpose of poor Mrs. Wilson's journey to Liverpool.

Presently she went to Job (the ever-ready Mrs. Davenport keeping
watch over the two old women), and told him her fears, her plans, and
her proceedings.

To her surprise he shook his head doubtfully.

"It may have an awkward look, if we keep her back. Lawyers is up to
tricks."

"But it's no trick," said Mary. "She is so poorly, she was last
night, at least; and to-day she's so faded and weak."

"Poor soul! I dare say. I only mean for Jem's sake; as so much is
known, it won't do now to hang back. But I'll ask Mr. Bridgenorth.
I'll e'en take your doctor's advice. Yo tarry at home, and I'll come
to yo in an hour's time. Go thy ways, wench."




CHAPTER XXV.

MRS. WILSON'S DETERMINATION.


   "Something there was, what, none presumed to say,
   Clouds lightly passing on a smiling day,--
   Whispers and hints which went from ear to ear,
   And mixed reports no judge on earth could clear."

   CRABBE.

   "Curious conjectures he may always make,
   And either side of dubious questions take."

   IB.


Mary went home. Oh! how her head did ache, and how dizzy her brain
was growing! But there would be time enough she felt for giving way,
hereafter.

So she sat quiet and still by an effort; sitting near the window, and
looking out of it, but seeing nothing, when all at once she caught
sight of something which roused her up, and made her draw back.

But it was too late. She had been seen.

Sally Leadbitter flaunted into the little dingy room, making it gaudy
with the Sunday excess of colouring in her dress.

She was really curious to see Mary; her connexion with a murderer
seemed to have made her into a sort of _lusus naturæ_, and was
almost, by some, expected to have made a change in her personal
appearance, so earnestly did they stare at her. But Mary had been too
much absorbed this last day or two to notice this.

Now Sally had a grand view, and looked her over and over (a very
different thing from looking her through and through), and almost
learnt her off by heart;--"her every-day gown (Hoyle's print you
know, that lilac thing with the high body) she was so fond of; a
little black silk handkerchief just knotted round her neck, like a
boy; her hair all taken back from her face, as if she wanted to keep
her head cool--she would always keep that hair of hers so long; and
her hands twitching continually about."

Such particulars would make Sally into a Gazette Extraordinary the
next morning at the work-room, and were worth coming for, even if
little else could be extracted from Mary.

"Why, Mary!" she began. "Where have you hidden yourself? You never
showed your face all yesterday at Miss Simmonds'. You don't fancy
we think any the worse of you for what's come and gone. Some on us,
indeed, were a bit sorry for the poor young man, as lies stiff and
cold for your sake, Mary; but we shall ne'er cast it up against you.
Miss Simmonds, too, will be mighty put out if you don't come, for
there's a deal of mourning, agait."

"I can't," Mary said, in a low voice. "I don't mean ever to come
again."

"Why, Mary!" said Sally, in unfeigned surprise. "To be sure you'll
have to be in Liverpool, Tuesday, and may be Wednesday; but after
that you'll surely come, and tell us all about it. Miss Simmonds
knows you'll have to be off those two days. But between you and me,
she's a bit of a gossip, and will like hearing all how and about the
trial, well enough to let you off very easy for your being absent a
day or two. Besides, Betsy Morgan was saying yesterday, she shouldn't
wonder but you'd prove quite an attraction to customers. Many a one
would come and have their gowns made by Miss Simmonds just to catch a
glimpse at you, at after the trial's over. Really, Mary, you'll turn
out quite a heroine."

The little fingers twitched worse than ever; the large soft eyes
looked up pleadingly into Sally's face; but she went on in the same
strain, not from any unkind or cruel feeling towards Mary, but solely
because she was incapable of comprehending her suffering.

She had been shocked, of course, at Mr. Carson's death, though at
the same time the excitement was rather pleasant than otherwise; and
dearly now would she have enjoyed the conspicuous notice which Mary
was sure to receive.

"How shall you like being cross-examined, Mary?"

"Not at all," answered Mary, when she found she must answer.

"La! what impudent fellows those lawyers are! And their clerks, too,
not a bit better. I shouldn't wonder" (in a comforting tone, and
really believing she was giving comfort) "if you picked up a new
sweetheart in Liverpool. What gown are you going in, Mary?"

"Oh, I don't know and don't care," exclaimed Mary, sick and weary of
her visitor.

"Well, then! take my advice, and go in that blue merino. It's old
to be sure, and a bit worn at elbows, but folk won't notice that,
and th' colour suits you. Now mind, Mary. And I'll lend you my black
watered scarf," added she, really good-naturedly, according to her
sense of things, and withal, a little bit pleased at the idea of her
pet article of dress figuring away on the person of a witness at a
trial for murder.

"I'll bring it to-morrow before you start."

"No, don't!" said Mary; "thank you, but I don't want it."

"Why, what can you wear? I know all your clothes as well as I do my
own, and what is there you can wear? Not your old plaid shawl, I do
hope? You would not fancy this I have on, more nor the scarf, would
you?" said she, brightening up at the thought, and willing to lend
it, or any thing else.

"Oh Sally! don't go on talking a-that-ns; how can I think on dress at
such a time? When it's a matter of life and death to Jem?"

"Bless the girl! It's Jem, is it? Well now, I thought there was some
sweetheart in the back-ground, when you flew off so with Mr. Carson.
Then what in the name of goodness made him shoot Mr. Harry? After you
had given up going with him, I mean? Was he afraid you'd be on
again?"

"How dare you say he shot Mr. Harry?" asked Mary, firing up from the
state of languid indifference into which she had sunk while Sally had
been settling about her dress. "But it's no matter what you think
as did not know him. What grieves me is, that people should go on
thinking him guilty as did know him," she said, sinking back into her
former depressed tone and manner.

"And don't you think he did it?" asked Sally.

Mary paused; she was going on too fast with one so curious and
so unscrupulous. Besides she remembered how even she herself had,
at first, believed him guilty; and she felt it was not for her to
cast stones at those who, on similar evidence, inclined to the same
belief. None had given him much benefit of a doubt. None had faith in
his innocence. None but his mother; and there the heart loved more
than the head reasoned, and her yearning affection had never for an
instant entertained the idea that her Jem was a murderer. But Mary
disliked the whole conversation; the subject, the manner in which it
was treated, were all painful, and she had a repugnance to the person
with whom she spoke.

She was thankful, therefore, when Job Legh's voice was heard at the
door, as he stood with the latch in his hand, talking to a neighbour,
and when Sally jumped up in vexation and said, "There's that old
fogey coming in here, as I'm alive! Did your father set him to
look after you while he was away? or what brings the old chap
here? However, I'm off; I never could abide either him or his prim
grand-daughter. Goodbye, Mary."

So far in a whisper, then louder,

"If you think better of my offer about the scarf, Mary, just step in
to-morrow before nine, and you're quite welcome to it."

She and Job passed each other at the door, with mutual looks of
dislike, which neither took any pains to conceal.

"Yon's a bold, bad girl," said Job to Mary.

"She's very good-natured," replied Mary, too honourable to abuse a
visitor who had only that instant crossed her threshold, and gladly
dwelling on the good quality most apparent in Sally's character.

"Ay, ay! good-natured, generous, jolly, full of fun; there are a
number of other names for the good qualities the devil leaves his
childer, as baits to catch gudgeons with. D'ye think folk could be
led astray by one who was every way bad? Howe'er, that's not what I
came to talk about. I've seen Mr. Bridgenorth, and he is in a manner
of the same mind as me; he thinks it would have an awkward look, and
might tell against the poor lad on his trial; still if she's ill
she's ill, and it can't be helped."

"I don't know if she's so bad as all that," said Mary, who began to
dread her part in doing any thing which might tell against her poor
lover.

"Will you come and see her, Job? The doctor seemed to say as I liked,
not as he thought."

"That's because he had no great thought on the subject, either one
way or t'other," replied Job, whose contempt for medical men pretty
nearly equalled his respect for lawyers. "But I'll go and welcome. I
han not seen th' oud ladies since their sorrows, and it's but manners
to go and ax after them. Come along."

The room at Mrs. Wilson's had that still, changeless look you
must have often observed in the house of sickness or mourning. No
particular employment going on; people watching and waiting rather
than acting, unless in the more sudden and violent attacks; what
little movement is going on, so noiseless and hushed; the furniture
all arranged and stationary, with a view to the comfort of the
afflicted; the window-blinds drawn down to keep out the disturbing
variety of a sun-beam; the same saddened, serious look on the faces
of the in-dwellers; you fall back into the same train of thought with
all these associations, and forget the street, the outer world, in
the contemplation of the one stationary, absorbing interest within.

Mrs. Wilson sat quietly in her chair, with just the same look Mary
had left on her face; Mrs. Davenport went about with creaking shoes,
which made all the more noise from her careful and lengthened tread,
annoying the ears of those who were well, in this instance, far
more than the dulled senses of the sick and the sorrowful. Alice's
voice still was going on cheerfully in the upper room with incessant
talking and little laughs to herself, or perhaps in sympathy with her
unseen companions; "unseen," I say, in preference to "fancied," for
who knows whether God does not permit the forms of those who were
dearest when living, to hover round the bed of the dying?

Job spoke, and Mrs. Wilson answered.

So quietly, that it was unnatural under the circumstances. It made
a deeper impression on the old man than any token of mere bodily
illness could have done. If she had raved in delirium, or moaned in
fever, he could have spoken after his wont, and given his opinion,
his advice, and his consolation; now he was awed into silence.

At length he pulled Mary aside into a corner of the house-place where
Mrs. Wilson was sitting, and began to talk to her.

"Yo're right, Mary! She's no ways fit to go to Liverpool, poor soul.
Now I've seen her, I only wonder the doctor could ha' been unsettled
in his mind at th' first. Choose how it goes wi' poor Jem, she cannot
go. One way or another it will soon be over, and best to leave her in
the state she is till then."

"I was sure you would think so," said Mary.

But they were reckoning without their host. They esteemed her senses
gone, while, in fact, they were only inert, and could not convey
impressions rapidly to the over-burdened, troubled brain. They had
not noticed that her eyes had followed them (mechanically it seemed
at first) as they had moved away to the corner of the room; that her
face, hitherto so changeless, had begun to work with one or two of
the old symptoms of impatience.

But when they were silent she stood up, and startled them almost as
if a dead person had spoken, by saying clearly and decidedly--"I go
to Liverpool. I hear you and your plans; and I tell you I shall go
to Liverpool. If my words are to kill my son, they have already gone
forth out of my mouth, and nought can bring them back. But I will
have faith. Alice (up above) has often telled me I wanted faith, and
now I will have it. They cannot--they will not kill my child, my only
child. I will not be afeared. Yet, oh! I am so sick with terror. But
if he is to die, think ye not that I will see him again; ay! see him
at his trial? When all are hating him, he shall have his poor mother
near him, to give him all the comfort, eyes, and looks, and tears,
and a heart that is dead to all but him, can give; his poor old
mother, who knows how free he is from sin--in the sight of man at
least. They'll let me go to him, maybe, the very minute it's over;
and I know many Scripture texts (though you would not think it), that
may keep up his heart. I missed seeing him ere he went to yon prison,
but nought shall keep me away again one minute when I can see his
face; for maybe the minutes are numbered, and the count but small.
I know I can be a comfort to him, poor lad. You would not think
it, now, but he'd alway speak as kind and soft to me as if he were
courting me, like. He loved me above a bit; and am I to leave him now
to dree all the cruel slander they'll put upon him? I can pray for
him at each hard word they say against him, if I can do nought else;
and he'll know what his mother is doing for him, poor lad, by the
look on my face."

Still they made some look, or gesture of opposition to her wishes.
She turned sharp round on Mary, the old object of her pettish
attacks, and said,

"Now, wench! once for all! I tell yo this. _He_ could never guide me;
and he'd sense enough not to try. What he could na do, don't you try.
I shall go to Liverpool to-morrow, and find my lad, and stay with
him through thick and thin; and if he dies, why, perhaps, God of
His mercy will take me too. The grave is a sure cure for an aching
heart."

She sank back in her chair, quite exhausted by the sudden effort
she had made; but if they even offered to speak, she cut them short
(whatever the subject might be), with the repetition of the same
words, "I shall go to Liverpool."

No more could be said, the doctor's opinion had been so undecided;
Mr. Bridgenorth had given his legal voice in favour of her going, and
Mary was obliged to relinquish the idea of persuading her to remain
at home, if indeed under all the circumstances it could be thought
desirable.

"Best way will be," said Job, "for me to hunt out Will, early
to-morrow morning, and yo, Mary, come at after with Jane Wilson. I
know a decent woman where yo two can have a bed, and where we may
meet together when I've found Will, afore going to Mr. Bridgenorth's
at two o'clock; for, I can tell him, I'll not trust none of his
clerks for hunting up Will, if Jem's life is to depend on it."

Now Mary disliked this plan inexpressibly; her dislike was partly
grounded on reason, and partly on feeling. She could not bear the
idea of deputing to any one the active measures necessary to be taken
in order to save Jem. She felt as if they were her duty, her right.
She durst not trust to any one the completion of her plan; they might
not have energy, or perseverance, or desperation enough to follow out
the slightest chance; and her love would endow her with all these
qualities, independently of the terrible alternative which awaited
her in case all failed and Jem was condemned. No one could have her
motives; and consequently no one could have her sharpened brain, her
despairing determination. Besides (only that was purely selfish), she
could not endure the suspense of remaining quiet, and only knowing
the result when all was accomplished.

So with vehemence and impatience she rebutted every reason Job
adduced for his plan; and of course, thus opposed, by what appeared
to him wilfulness, he became more resolute, and angry words were
exchanged, and a feeling of estrangement rose up between them, for a
time, as they walked homewards.

But then came in Margaret with her gentleness, like an angel of
peace, so calm and reasonable, that both felt ashamed of their
irritation, and tacitly left the decision to her (only, by the way,
I think Mary could never have submitted if it had gone against her,
penitent and tearful as was her manner now to Job, the good old man
who was helping her to work for Jem, although they differed as to the
manner).

"Mary had better go," said Margaret to her grandfather, in a low
tone, "I know what she's feeling, and it will be a comfort to her
soon, may be, to think she did all she could herself. She would
perhaps fancy it might have been different; do, grandfather, let
her."

Margaret had still, you see, little or no belief in Jem's innocence;
and besides, she thought if Mary saw Will, and heard herself from him
that Jem had not been with him that Thursday night, it would in a
measure break the force of the blow which was impending.

"Let me lock up house, grandfather, for a couple of days, and go and
stay with Alice. It's but little one like me can do, I know" (she
added softly); "but, by the blessing o' God, I'll do it and welcome;
and here comes one kindly use o' money, I can hire them as will do
for her what I cannot. Mrs. Davenport is a willing body, and one who
knows sorrow and sickness, and I can pay her for her time, and keep
her there pretty near altogether. So let that be settled. And you
take Mrs. Wilson, dear grandad, and let Mary go find Will, and you
can all meet together at after, and I'm sure I wish you luck."

Job consented with only a few dissenting grunts; but on the whole,
with a very good grace for an old man who had been so positive only a
few minutes before.

Mary was thankful for Margaret's interference. She did not speak, but
threw her arms round Margaret's neck, and put up her rosy-red mouth
to be kissed; and even Job was attracted by the pretty, child-like
gesture; and when she drew near him, afterwards, like a little
creature sidling up to some person whom it feels to have offended, he
bent down and blessed her, as if she had been a child of his own.

To Mary the old man's blessing came like words of power.




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE JOURNEY TO LIVERPOOL.


   "Like a bark upon the sea,
     Life is floating over death;
   Above, below, encircling thee,
     Danger lurks in every breath.

   Parted art thou from the grave
     Only by a plank most frail;
   Tossed upon the restless wave,
     Sport of every fickle gale.

   Let the skies be e'er so clear,
     And so calm and still the sea,
   Shipwreck yet has he to fear,
     Who life's voyager will be."

   RÜCKERT.


The early trains for Liverpool, on Monday morning, were crowded by
attorneys, attorneys' clerks, plaintiffs, defendants, and witnesses,
all going to the Assizes. They were a motley assembly, each with
some cause for anxiety stirring at his heart; though, after all,
that is saying little or nothing, for we are all of us in the same
predicament through life; each with a fear and a hope from childhood
to death. Among the passengers there was Mary Barton, dressed in the
blue gown and obnoxious plaid shawl.

Common as railroads are now in all places as a means of transit, and
especially in Manchester, Mary had never been on one before; and she
felt bewildered by the hurry, the noise of people, and bells, and
horns; the whiz and the scream of the arriving trains.

The very journey itself seemed to her a matter of wonder. She had a
back seat, and looked towards the factory-chimneys, and the cloud
of smoke which hovers over Manchester, with a feeling akin to the
"Heimweh." She was losing sight of the familiar objects of her
childhood for the first time; and unpleasant as those objects are to
most, she yearned after them with some of the same sentiment which
gives pathos to the thoughts of the emigrant.

The cloud-shadows which give beauty to Chat-Moss, the picturesque old
houses of Newton, what were they to Mary, whose heart was full of
many things? Yet she seemed to look at them earnestly as they glided
past; but she neither saw nor heard.

She neither saw nor heard till some well-known names fell upon her
ear.

Two lawyers' clerks were discussing the cases to come on that
Assizes; of course, "the murder-case," as it had come to be termed,
held a conspicuous place in their conversation.

They had no doubt of the result.

"Juries are always very unwilling to convict on circumstantial
evidence, it is true," said one, "but here there can hardly be any
doubt."

"If it had not been so clear a case," replied the other, "I should
have said they were injudicious in hurrying on the trial so much.
Still, more evidence might have been collected."

"They tell me," said the first speaker,--"the people in Gardener's
office I mean,--that it was really feared the old gentleman would
have gone out of his mind, if the trial had been delayed. He was with
Mr. Gardener as many as seven times on Saturday, and called him up
at night to suggest that some letter should be written, or something
done to secure the verdict."

"Poor old man," answered his companion, "who can wonder?--an only
son,--such a death,--the disagreeable circumstances attending it; I
had not time to read the _Guardian_ on Saturday, but I understand it
was some dispute about a factory girl."

"Yes, some such person. Of course she'll be examined, and Williams
will do it in style. I shall slip out from our court to hear him if
I can hit the nick of time."

"And if you can get a place, you mean, for depend upon it the court
will be crowded."

"Ay, ay, the ladies (sweet souls) will come in shoals to hear a trial
for murder, and see the murderer, and watch the judge put on his
black cap."

"And then go home and groan over the Spanish ladies who take delight
in bull-fights--'such unfeminine creatures!'"

Then they went on to other subjects.

It was but another drop to Mary's cup; but she was nearly in that
state which Crabbe describes,

   "For when so full the cup of sorrows flows
   Add but a drop, it instantly o'erflows."

And now they were in the tunnel!--and now they were in Liverpool;
and she must rouse herself from the torpor of mind and body which
was creeping over her; the result of much anxiety and fatigue, and
several sleepless nights.

She asked a policeman the way to Milk House Yard, and following his
directions with the _savoir faire_ of a town-bred girl, she reached a
little court leading out of a busy, thronged street, not far from the
Docks.

When she entered the quiet little yard she stopped to regain her
breath, and to gather strength, for her limbs trembled, and her heart
beat violently.

All the unfavourable contingencies she had, until now, forbidden
herself to dwell upon, came forward to her mind. The possibility,
the bare possibility, of Jem being an accomplice in the murder; the
still greater possibility that he had not fulfilled his intention of
going part of the way with Will, but had been led off by some little
accidental occurrence from his original intention; and that he had
spent the evening with those, whom it was now too late to bring
forward as witnesses.

But sooner or later she must know the truth; so taking courage she
knocked at the door of a house.

"Is this Mrs. Jones's?" she inquired.

"Next door but one," was the curt answer.

And even this extra minute was a reprieve.

Mrs. Jones was busy washing, and would have spoken angrily to the
person who knocked so gently at the door, if anger had been in her
nature; but she was a soft, helpless kind of woman, and only sighed
over the many interruptions she had had to her business that unlucky
Monday morning.

But the feeling which would have been anger in a more impatient
temper, took the form of prejudice against the disturber, whoever he
or she might be.

Mary's fluttered and excited appearance strengthened this prejudice
in Mrs. Jones's mind, as she stood, stripping the soap-suds off her
arms, while she eyed her visitor, and waited to be told what her
business was.

But no words would come. Mary's voice seemed choked up in her throat.

"Pray what do you want, young woman?" coldly asked Mrs. Jones at
last.

"I want--Oh! is Will Wilson here?"

"No, he is not," replied Mrs. Jones, inclining to shut the door in
her face.

"Is he not come back from the Isle of Man?" asked Mary, sickening.

"He never went; he stayed in Manchester too long; as perhaps you
know, already."

And again the door seemed closing.

But Mary bent forwards with suppliant action (as some young tree
bends, when blown by the rough, autumnal wind), and gasped out,

"Tell me--tell me--where is he?"

Mrs. Jones suspected some love affair, and, perhaps, one of not the
most creditable kind; but the distress of the pale young creature
before her was so obvious and so pitiable, that were she ever so
sinful, Mrs. Jones could no longer uphold her short, reserved manner.

"He's gone this very morning, my poor girl. Step in, and I'll tell
you about it."

"Gone!" cried Mary. "How gone? I must see him,--it's a matter of life
and death: he can save the innocent from being hanged,--he cannot be
gone,--how gone?"

"Sailed, my dear! sailed in the _John Cropper_ this very blessed
morning."

"Sailed!"




CHAPTER XXVII.

IN THE LIVERPOOL DOCKS.


   "Yon is our quay!
   Hark to the clamour in that miry road,
   Bounded and narrowed by yon vessel's load;
   The lumbering wealth she empties round the place,
   Package and parcel, hogshead, chest and case:
   While the loud seaman and the angry hind,
   Mingling in business, bellow to the wind."

   CRABBE.


Mary staggered into the house. Mrs. Jones placed her tenderly in a
chair, and there stood bewildered by her side.

"Oh, father! father!" muttered she, "what have you done?--What must I
do? must the innocent die?--or he--whom I fear--I fear--oh! what am I
saying?" said she, looking round affrighted, and seemingly reassured
by Mrs. Jones's countenance, "I am so helpless, so weak,--but a poor
girl after all. How can I tell what is right? Father! you have always
been so kind to me,--and you to be--never mind--never mind, all will
come right in the grave."

"Save us, and bless us!" exclaimed Mrs. Jones, "if I don't think
she's gone out of her wits!"

"No, I'm not!" said Mary, catching at the words, and with a strong
effort controlling the mind she felt to be wandering, while the red
blood flushed to scarlet the heretofore white cheek, "I'm not out of
my senses; there is so much to be done--so much--and no one but me to
do it, you know,--though I can't rightly tell what it is," looking up
with bewilderment into Mrs. Jones's face. "I must not go mad whatever
comes--at least not yet. No!" (bracing herself up) "something may yet
be done, and I must do it. Sailed! did you say? The _John Cropper_?
Sailed?"

"Ay! she went out of dock last night, to be ready for the morning's
tide."

"I thought she was not to sail till to-morrow," murmured Mary.

"So did Will (he's lodged here long, so we all call him 'Will'),"
replied Mrs. Jones. "The mate had told him so, I believe, and he
never knew different till he got to Liverpool on Friday morning; but
as soon as he heard, he gave up going to the Isle o' Man, and just
ran over to Rhyl with the mate, one John Harris, as has friends a bit
beyond Abergele; you may have heard him speak on him, for they are
great chums, though I've my own opinion of Harris."

"And he's sailed?" repeated Mary, trying by repetition to realise the
fact to herself.

"Ay, he went on board last night to be ready for the morning's tide,
as I said afore, and my boy went to see the ship go down the river,
and came back all agog with the sight. Here, Charley, Charley!" She
called out loudly for her son: but Charley was one of those boys who
are never "far to seek," as the Lancashire people say, when any thing
is going on; a mysterious conversation, an unusual event, a fire, or
a riot, any thing, in short; such boys are the little omnipresent
people of this world.

Charley had, in fact, been spectator and auditor all this time;
though for a little while he had been engaged in "dollying" and a few
other mischievous feats in the washing line, which had prevented his
attention from being fully given to his mother's conversation with
the strange girl who had entered.

"Oh, Charley! there you are! Did you not see the _John Cropper_ sail
down the river this morning? Tell the young woman about it, for I
think she hardly credits me."

"I saw her tugged down the river by a steam-boat, which comes to same
thing," replied he.

"Oh! if I had but come last night!" moaned Mary. "But I never thought
of it. I never thought but what he knew right when he said he would
be back from the Isle of Man on Monday morning, and not afore--and
now some one must die for my negligence!"

"Die!" exclaimed the lad. "How?"

"Oh! Will would have proved an _alibi_,--but he's gone,--and what am
I to do?"

"Don't give it up yet," cried the energetic boy, interested at once
in the case; "let's have a try for him. We are but where we were if
we fail."

Mary roused herself. The sympathetic "we" gave her heart and hope.
"But what can be done? You say he's sailed; what can be done?" But
she spoke louder, and in a more life-like tone.

"No! I did not say he'd sailed; mother said that, and women know
nought about such matters. You see" (proud of his office of
instructor, and insensibly influenced, as all about her were, by
Mary's sweet, earnest, lovely countenance) "there's sand-banks at the
mouth of the river, and ships can't get over them but at high-water;
especially ships of heavy burden, like the _John Cropper_. Now, she
was tugged down the river at low water, or pretty near, and will have
to lie some time before the water will be high enough to float her
over the banks. So hold up your head,--you've a chance yet, though
may be but a poor one."

"But what must I do?" asked Mary, to whom all this explanation had
been a vague mystery.

"Do!" said the boy, impatiently, "why, have not I told you? Only
women (begging your pardon) are so stupid at understanding about any
thing belonging to the sea;--you must get a boat, and make all haste,
and sail after him,--after the _John Cropper_. You may overtake her,
or you may not. It's just a chance; but she's heavy laden, and that's
in your favour. She'll draw many feet of water."

Mary had humbly and eagerly (oh, how eagerly!) listened to this young
Sir Oracle's speech; but try as she would, she could only understand
that she must make haste, and sail--somewhere--

"I beg your pardon," (and her little acknowledgment of inferiority
in this speech pleased the lad, and made him her still more zealous
friend). "I beg your pardon," said she, "but I don't know where to
get a boat. Are there boat-stands?"

The lad laughed outright.

"You're not long in Liverpool, I guess. Boat-stands! No; go down to
the pier,--any pier will do, and hire a boat,--you'll be at no loss
when once you are there. Only make haste."

"Oh, you need not tell me that, if I but knew how," said Mary,
trembling with eagerness. "But you say right,--I never was here
before, and I don't know my way to the place you speak on; only tell
me, and I'll not lose a minute."

"Mother!" said the wilful lad, "I'm going to show her the way to the
pier; I'll be back in an hour,--or so,--" he added in a lower tone.

And before the gentle Mrs. Jones could collect her scattered wits
sufficiently to understand half of the hastily formed plan, her son
was scudding down the street, closely followed by Mary's half-running
steps.

Presently he slackened his pace sufficiently to enable him to enter
into conversation with Mary, for once escaped from the reach of his
mother's recalling voice, he thought he might venture to indulge his
curiosity.

"Ahem!--What's your name? It's so awkward to be calling you young
woman."

"My name is Mary,--Mary Barton," answered she, anxious to propitiate
one who seemed so willing to exert himself in her behalf, or else
she grudged every word which caused the slightest relaxation in her
speed, although her chest seemed tightened, and her head throbbing,
from the rate at which they were walking.

"And you want Will Wilson to prove an _alibi_--is that it?"

"Yes--oh, yes--can we not cross now?"

"No, wait a minute; it's the teagle hoisting above your head I'm
afraid of;--and who is it that's to be tried?"

"Jem; oh, lad! can't we get past?"

They rushed under the great bales quivering in the air above their
heads and pressed onwards for a few minutes, till Master Charley
again saw fit to walk a little slower, and ask a few more questions.

"Mary, is Jem your brother, or your sweetheart, that you're so set
upon saving him?"

"No--no," replied she, but with something of hesitation, that made
the shrewd boy yet more anxious to clear up the mystery.

"Perhaps he's your cousin, then? Many a girl has a cousin who has not
a sweetheart."

"No, he's neither kith nor kin to me. What's the matter? What are you
stopping for?" said she, with nervous terror, as Charley turned back
a few steps, and peered up a side street.

"Oh, nothing to flurry you so, Mary. I heard you say to mother you
had never been in Liverpool before, and if you'll only look up this
street you may see the back windows of our Exchange. Such a building
as yon is! with 'natomy hiding under a blanket, and Lord Admiral
Nelson, and a few more people in the middle of the court! No! come
here," as Mary, in her eagerness, was looking at any window that
caught her eye first, to satisfy the boy. "Here, then, now you can
see it. You can say, now, you've seen Liverpool Exchange."

"Yes, to be sure--it's a beautiful window, I'm sure. But are we near
the boats? I'll stop as I come back, you know; only I think we'd
better get on now."

"Oh! if the wind's in your favour, you'll be down the river in no
time, and catch Will, I'll be bound; and if it's not, why, you know,
the minute it took you to look at the Exchange will be neither here
nor there."

Another rush onwards, till one of the long crossings near the docks
caused a stoppage, and gave Mary time for breathing, and Charley
leisure to ask another question.

"You've never said where you come from?"

"Manchester," replied she.

"Eh, then! you've a power of things to see. Liverpool beats
Manchester hollow, they say. A nasty, smoky hole, bean't it? Are you
bound to live there?"

"Oh, yes! it's my home."

"Well, I don't think I could abide a home in the middle of smoke.
Look there! now you see the river! That's something now you'd give
a deal for in Manchester. Look!"

And Mary did look, and saw down an opening made in the forest of
masts belonging to the vessels in dock, the glorious river, along
which white-sailed ships were gliding with the ensigns of all
nations, not "braving the battle," but telling of the distant lands,
spicy or frozen, that sent to that mighty mart for their comforts
or their luxuries; she saw small boats passing to and fro on that
glittering highway, but she also saw such puffs and clouds of
smoke from the countless steamers, that she wondered at Charley's
intolerance of the smoke of Manchester. Across the swing-bridge,
along the pier,--and they stood breathless by a magnificent dock,
where hundreds of ships lay motionless during the process of loading
and unloading. The cries of the sailors, the variety of languages
used by the passers-by, and the entire novelty of the sight compared
with any thing which Mary had ever seen, made her feel most helpless
and forlorn; and she clung to her young guide as to one who alone by
his superior knowledge could interpret between her and the new race
of men by whom she was surrounded,--for a new race sailors might
reasonably be considered, to a girl who had hitherto seen none but
inland dwellers, and those for the greater part factory people.

In that new world of sight and sound, she still bore one prevailing
thought, and though her eye glanced over the ships and the
wide-spreading river, her mind was full of the thought of reaching
Will.

"Why are we here?" asked she of Charley. "There are no little boats
about, and I thought I was to go in a little boat; those ships are
never meant for short distances, are they?"

"To be sure not," replied he, rather contemptuously. "But the _John
Cropper_ lay in this dock, and I know many of the sailors; and if I
could see one I knew, I'd ask him to run up the mast, and see if he
could catch a sight of her in the offing. If she's weighed her anchor
no use for your going, you know."

Mary assented quietly to this speech, as if she were as careless as
Charley seemed now to be about her overtaking Will; but in truth her
heart was sinking within her, and she no longer felt the energy which
had hitherto upheld her. Her bodily strength was giving way, and she
stood cold and shivering, although the noon-day sun beat down with
considerable power on the shadeless spot where she was standing.

"Here's Tom Bourne!" said Charley; and altering his manner from
the patronising key in which he had spoken to Mary, he addressed a
weather-beaten old sailor who came rolling along the pathway where
they stood, his hands in his pockets, and his quid in his mouth, with
very much the air of one who had nothing to do but look about him,
and spit right and left; addressing this old tar, Charley made known
to him his wish in slang, which to Mary was almost inaudible, and
quite unintelligible, and which I am too much of a land-lubber to
repeat correctly.

Mary watched looks and actions with a renovated keenness of
perception.

She saw the old man listen attentively to Charley; she saw him eye
her over from head to foot, and wind up his inspection with a little
nod of approbation (for her very shabbiness and poverty of dress were
creditable signs to the experienced old sailor); and then she watched
him leisurely swing himself on to a ship in the basin, and, borrowing
a glass, run up the mast with the speed of a monkey.

"He'll fall!" said she, in affright, clutching at Charley's arm, and
judging the sailor, from his storm-marked face and unsteady walk on
land, to be much older than he really was.

"Not he!" said Charley. "He's at the mast-head now. See! he's looking
through his glass, and using his arms as steady as if he were on
dry land. Why, I've been up the mast, many and many a time; only
don't tell mother. She thinks I'm to be a shoemaker, but I've made
up my mind to be a sailor; only there's no good arguing with a woman.
You'll not tell her, Mary?"

"Oh, see!" exclaimed she (his secret was very safe with her, for, in
fact, she had not heard it). "See! he's coming down; he's down. Speak
to him, Charley."

But unable to wait another instant she called out herself,

"Can you see the _John Cropper_? Is she there yet?"

"Ay, ay," he answered, and coming quickly up to them, he hurried them
away to seek for a boat, saying the bar was already covered, and in
an hour the ship would hoist her sails and be off. "You've the wind
right against you, and must use oars. No time to lose."

They ran to some steps leading down to the water. They beckoned to
some watermen, who, suspecting the real state of the case, appeared
in no hurry for a fare, but leisurely brought their boat alongside
the stairs, as if it were a matter of indifference to them whether
they were engaged or not, while they conversed together in few words,
and in an under-tone, respecting the charge they should make.

"Oh, pray make haste," called Mary. "I want you to take me to the
_John Cropper_. Where is she, Charley? Tell them--I don't rightly
know the words,--only make haste!"

"In the offing she is, sure enough, miss," answered one of the men,
shoving Charley on one side, regarding him as too young to be a
principal in the bargain.

"I don't think we can go, Dick," said he, with a wink to his
companion; "there's the gentleman over at New Brighton as wants us."

"But, mayhap, the young woman will pay us handsome for giving her a
last look at her sweetheart," interposed the other.

"Oh, how much do you want? Only make haste--I've enough to pay you,
but every moment is precious," said Mary.

"Ay, that it is. Less than an hour won't take us to the mouth of the
river, and she'll be off by two o'clock!"

Poor Mary's ideas of "plenty of money," however, were different to
those entertained by the boatmen. Only fourteen or fifteen shillings
remained out of the sovereign Margaret had lent her, and the boatmen,
imagining "plenty" to mean no less than several pounds, insisted
upon receiving a sovereign (an exorbitant fare, by the bye, although
reduced from their first demand of thirty shillings).

While Charley, with a boy's impatience of delay, and disregard of
money, kept urging,

"Give it 'em, Mary; they'll none of them take you for less. It's your
only chance. There's St. Nicholas ringing one!"

"I've only got fourteen and ninepence," cried she, in despair, after
counting over her money; "but I'll give you my shawl, and you can
sell it for four or five shillings,--oh! won't that much do?" asked
she, in such a tone of voice, that they must indeed have had hard
hearts who could refuse such agonised entreaty.

They took her on board.

And in less than five minutes she was rocking and tossing in a boat
for the first time in her life, alone with two rough, hard-looking
men.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

"JOHN CROPPER, AHOY!"


   "A wet sheet and a flowing sea,
     A wind that follows fast
   And fills the white and rustling sail,
     And bends the gallant mast!
   And bends the gallant mast, my boys,
     While, like the eagle free,
   Away the good ship flies, and leaves
     Old England on the lee."

   ALLAN CUNNINGHAM.


Mary had not understood that Charley was not coming with her. In
fact, she had not thought about it, till she perceived his absence,
as they pushed off from the landing-place, and remembered that she
had never thanked him for all his kind interest in her behalf; and
now his absence made her feel most lonely--even his, the little
mushroom friend of an hour's growth.

The boat threaded her way through the maze of larger vessels which
surrounded the shore, bumping against one, kept off by the oars from
going right against another, overshadowed by a third, until at length
they were fairly out on the broad river, away from either shore; the
sights and sounds of land being lost in the distance.

And then came a sort of pause.

Both wind and tide were against the two men, and labour as they would
they made but little way. Once Mary in her impatience had risen up to
obtain a better view of the progress they had made, but the men had
roughly told her to sit down immediately, and she had dropped on her
seat like a chidden child, although the impatience was still at her
heart.

But now she grew sure they were turning off from the straight course
which they had hitherto kept on the Cheshire side of the river,
whither they had gone to avoid the force of the current, and after
a short time she could not help naming her conviction, as a kind of
nightmare dread and belief came over her, that every thing animate
and inanimate was in league against her one sole aim and object of
overtaking Will.

They answered gruffly. They saw a boatman whom they knew, and were
desirous of obtaining his services as steersman, so that both might
row with greater effect. They knew what they were about. So she sat
silent with clenched hands while the parley went on, the explanation
was given, the favour asked and granted. But she was sickening all
the time with nervous fear.

They had been rowing a long, long time--half a day it seemed, at
least--yet Liverpool appeared still close at hand, and Mary began
almost to wonder that the men were not as much disheartened as she
was, when the wind, which had been hitherto against them, dropped,
and thin clouds began to gather over the sky, shutting out the sun,
and casting a chilly gloom over every thing.

There was not a breath of air, and yet it was colder than when the
soft violence of the westerly wind had been felt.

The men renewed their efforts. The boat gave a bound forwards
at every pull of the oars. The water was glassy and motionless,
reflecting tint by tint of the Indian-ink sky above. Mary shivered,
and her heart sank within her. Still now they evidently were making
progress. Then the steersman pointed to a rippling line in the river
only a little way off, and the men disturbed Mary, who was watching
the ships that lay in what appeared to her the open sea, to get at
their sails.

She gave a little start, and rose. Her patience, her grief, and
perhaps her silence, had begun to win upon the men.

"Yon second to the norrard is the _John Cropper_. Wind's right now,
and sails will soon carry us alongside of her."

He had forgotten (or perhaps he did not like to remind Mary) that the
same wind which now bore their little craft along with easy, rapid
motion, would also be favourable to the _John Cropper_.

But as they looked with straining eyes, as if to measure the
decreasing distance that separated them from her, they saw her sails
unfurled and flap in the breeze, till, catching the right point, they
bellied forth into white roundness, and the ship began to plunge and
heave, as if she were a living creature, impatient to be off.

"They're heaving anchor!" said one of the boatmen to the others, as
the faint musical cry of the sailors came floating over the waters
that still separated them.

Full of the spirit of the chase, though as yet ignorant of Mary's
motives, the men sprang to hoist another sail. It was fully as much
as the boat could bear, in the keen, gusty east wind which was now
blowing, and she bent, and laboured, and ploughed, and creaked
upbraidingly as if tasked beyond her strength; but she sped along
with a gallant swiftness.

They drew nearer, and they heard the distant "ahoy" more clearly. It
ceased. The anchor was up, and the ship was away.

Mary stood up, steadying herself by the mast, and stretched out her
arms, imploring the flying vessel to stay its course by that mute
action, while the tears streamed down her cheeks. The men caught
up their oars and hoisted them in the air, and shouted to arrest
attention.

They were seen by the men aboard the larger craft; but they were too
busy with all the confusion prevalent in an outward-bound vessel to
pay much attention. There were coils of ropes and seamen's chests
to be stumbled over at every turn; there were animals, not properly
secured, roaming bewildered about the deck, adding their pitiful
lowings and bleatings to the aggregate of noises. There were carcases
not cut up, looking like corpses of sheep and pigs rather than like
mutton and pork; there were sailors running here and there and
everywhere, having had no time to fall into method, and with their
minds divided between thoughts of the land and the people they had
left, and the present duties on board ship; while the captain strove
hard to procure some kind of order by hasty commands given in a loud,
impatient voice, to right and left, starboard and larboard, cabin and
steerage.

As he paced the deck with a chafed step, vexed at one or two little
mistakes on the part of the mate, and suffering himself from the pain
of separation from wife and children, but showing his suffering only
by his outward irritation, he heard a hail from the shabby little
river-boat that was striving to overtake his winged ship. For the
men fearing that, as the ship was now fairly over the bar, they
should only increase the distance between them, and being now within
shouting range, had asked of Mary her more particular desire.

Her throat was dry; all musical sound had gone out of her voice;
but in a loud harsh whisper she told the men her errand of life and
death, and they hailed the ship.

"We're come for one William Wilson, who is wanted to prove an _alibi_
in Liverpool Assize Courts to-morrow. James Wilson is to be tried for
a murder, done on Thursday night, when he was with William Wilson.
Any thing more, missis?" asked the boat-man of Mary, in a lower
voice, and taking his hands down from his mouth.

"Say I'm Mary Barton. Oh, the ship is going on! Oh, for the love of
Heaven, ask them to stop."

The boatman was angry at the little regard paid to his summons, and
called out again; repeating the message with the name of the young
woman who sent it, and interlarding it with sailors' oaths.

The ship flew along--away,--the boat struggled after.

They could see the captain take his speaking-trumpet. And oh! and
alas! they heard his words.

He swore a dreadful oath; he called Mary a disgraceful name; and he
said he would not stop his ship for any one, nor could he part with
a single hand, whoever swung for it.

The words came in unpitying clearness with their trumpet-sound. Mary
sat down, looking like one who prays in the death-agony. For her eyes
were turned up to that Heaven, where mercy dwelleth, while her blue
lips quivered, though no sound came. Then she bowed her head and hid
it in her hands.

"Hark! yon sailor hails us."

She looked up. And her heart stopped its beating to listen.

William Wilson stood as near the stern of the vessel as he could get;
and unable to obtain the trumpet from the angry captain, made a tube
of his own hands.

"So help me God, Mary Barton, I'll come back in the pilot-boat, time
enough to save the life of the innocent."

"What does he say?" asked Mary wildly, as the voice died away in the
increasing distance, while the boatmen cheered, in their kindled
sympathy with their passenger.

"What does he say?" repeated she. "Tell me. I could not hear."

She had heard with her ears, but her brain refused to recognise the
sense.

They repeated his speech, all three speaking at once, with many
comments; while Mary looked at them and then at the vessel now far
away.

"I don't rightly know about it," said she, sorrowfully. "What is the
pilot-boat?"

They told her, and she gathered the meaning out of the sailors' slang
which enveloped it. There was a hope still, although so slight and
faint.

"How far does the pilot go with the ship?"

To different distances they said. Some pilots would go as far as
Holyhead for the chance of the homeward-bound vessels; others only
took the ships over the Banks. Some captains were more cautious than
others, and the pilots had different ways. The wind was against
the homeward bound vessels, so perhaps the pilot aboard the _John
Cropper_ would not care to go far out.

"How soon would he come back?"

There were three boatmen, and three opinions, varying from twelve
hours to two days. Nay, the man who gave his vote for the longest
time, on having his judgment disputed, grew stubborn, and doubled
the time, and thought it might be the end of the week before the
pilot-boat came home.

They began disputing, and urging reasons; and Mary tried to
understand them; but independently of their nautical language, a veil
seemed drawn over her mind, and she had no clear perception of any
thing that passed. Her very words seemed not her own, and beyond her
power of control, for she found herself speaking quite differently to
what she meant.

One by one her hopes had fallen away, and left her desolate; and
though a chance yet remained, she could no longer hope. She felt
certain it, too, would fade and vanish. She sank into a kind of
stupor. All outward objects harmonised with her despair.

The gloomy leaden sky,--the deep, dark waters below, of a still
heavier shade of colour,--the cold, flat yellow shore in the
distance, which no ray lightened up,--the nipping, cutting wind.

She shivered with her depression of mind and body.

The sails were taken down, of course, on the return to Liverpool,
and the progress they made, rowing and tacking, was very slow. The
men talked together, disputing about the pilots at first, and then
about matters of local importance, in which Mary would have taken no
interest at any time, and she gradually became drowsy; irrepressibly
so, indeed, for in spite of her jerking efforts to keep awake she
sank away to the bottom of the boat, and there lay couched on a rough
heap of sails, rope, and tackle of various kinds.

The measured beat of the waters against the sides of the boat, and
the musical boom of the more distant waves, were more lulling than
silence, and she slept sound.

Once she opened her eyes heavily, and dimly saw the old gray, rough
boatman (who had stood out the most obstinately for the full fare)
covering her with his thick pea-jacket. He had taken it off on
purpose, and was doing it tenderly in his way, but before she could
rouse herself up to thank him she had dropped off to sleep again.

At last, in the dusk of evening, they arrived at the landing-place
from which they had started some hours before. The men spoke to Mary,
but though she mechanically replied, she did not stir; so, at length,
they were obliged to shake her. She stood up, shivering and puzzled
as to her whereabouts.

"Now tell me where you are bound to, missis," said the gray old man,
"and maybe I can put you in the way."

She slowly comprehended what he said, and went through the process of
recollection; but very dimly, and with much labour. She put her hand
into her pocket and pulled out her purse, and shook its contents into
the man's hand; and then began meekly to unpin her shawl, although
they had turned away without asking for it.

"No, no!" said the older man, who lingered on the step before
springing into the boat, and to whom she mutely offered the shawl.

"Keep it! we donnot want it. It were only for to try you,--some folks
say they've no more blunt, when all the while they've getten a mint."

"Thank you," said she, in a dull, low tone.

"Where are you bound to? I axed that question afore," said the gruff
old fellow.

"I don't know. I'm a stranger," replied she, quietly, with a strange
absence of anxiety under the circumstances.

"But you mun find out then," said he, sharply, "pier-head's no place
for a young woman to be standing on, gape-saying."

"I've a card somewhere as will tell me," she answered, and the man,
partly relieved, jumped into the boat, which was now pushing off to
make way for the arrivals from some steamer.

Mary felt in her pocket for the card, on which was written the name
of the street where she was to have met Mr. Bridgenorth at two
o'clock; where Job and Mrs. Wilson were to have been, and where
she was to have learnt from the former the particulars of some
respectable lodging. It was not to be found.

She tried to brighten her perceptions, and felt again, and took
out the little articles her pocket contained, her empty purse, her
pocket-handkerchief, and such little things, but it was not there.

In fact she had dropped it when, so eager to embark, she had pulled
out her purse to reckon up her money.

She did not know this, of course. She only knew it was gone.

It added but little to the despair that was creeping over her. But
she tried a little more to help herself, though every minute her mind
became more cloudy. She strove to remember where Will had lodged, but
she could not; name, street, every thing had passed away, and it did
not signify; better she were lost than found.

She sat down quietly on the top step of the landing, and gazed down
into the dark, dank water below. Once or twice a spectral thought
loomed among the shadows of her brain; a wonder whether beneath that
cold dismal surface there would not be rest from the troubles of
earth. But she could not hold an idea before her for two consecutive
moments; and she forgot what she thought about before she could act
upon it.

So she continued sitting motionless, without looking up, or regarding
in any way the insults to which she was subjected.

Through the darkening light the old boatman had watched her:
interested in her in spite of himself, and his scoldings of himself.

When the landing-place was once more comparatively clear, he made his
way towards it, across boats, and along planks, swearing at himself
while he did so, for an old fool.

He shook Mary's shoulder violently.

"D---- you, I ask you again where you're bound to? Don't sit there,
stupid. Where are you going to?"

"I don't know," sighed Mary.

"Come, come; avast with that story. You said a bit ago you'd a card,
which was to tell you where to go."

"I had, but I've lost it. Never mind."

She looked again down upon the black mirror below.

He stood by her, striving to put down his better self; but he could
not. He shook her again. She looked up, as if she had forgotten him.

"What do you want?" asked she, wearily.

"Come with me, and be d----d to you!" replied he, clutching her arm
to pull her up.

She arose and followed him, with the unquestioning docility of a
little child.




CHAPTER XXIX.

A TRUE BILL AGAINST JEM.


   "There are who, living by the legal pen,
   Are held in honour--honourable men."

   CRABBE.


At five minutes before two, Job Legh stood upon the door-step of the
house where Mr. Bridgenorth lodged at Assize time. He had left Mrs.
Wilson at the dwelling of a friend of his, who had offered him a room
for the old woman and Mary: a room which had frequently been his, on
his occasional visits to Liverpool, but which he was thankful now to
have obtained for them, as his own sleeping-place was a matter of
indifference to him, and the town appeared crowded and disorderly on
the eve of the Assizes.

He was shown in to Mr. Bridgenorth, who was writing. Mary and Will
Wilson had not yet arrived, being, as you know, far away on the broad
sea; but of this Job of course knew nothing, and he did not as yet
feel much anxiety about their non-appearance; he was more curious to
know the result of Mr. Bridgenorth's interview that morning with Jem.

"Why, yes," said Mr. Bridgenorth, putting down his pen, "I
have seen him, but to little purpose, I'm afraid. He's very
impracticable--very. I told him, of course, that he must be perfectly
open with me, or else I could not be prepared for the weak points. I
named your name with the view of unlocking his confidence, but--"

"What did he say?" asked Job, breathlessly.

"Why, very little. He barely answered me. Indeed, he refused to
answer some questions--positively refused. I don't know what I can do
for him."

"Then you think him guilty, sir?" said Job, despondingly.

"No, I don't," replied Mr. Bridgenorth, quickly and decisively. "Much
less than I did before I saw him. The impression (mind, 'tis only
impression; I rely upon your caution, not to take it for fact)--the
impression," with an emphasis on the word, "he gave me is, that he
knows something about the affair, but what, he will not say; and so
the chances are, if he persists in his obstinacy, he'll be hung.
That's all."

He began to write again, for he had no time to lose.

"But he must not be hung," said Job, with vehemence.

Mr. Bridgenorth looked up, smiled a little, but shook his head.

"What did he say, sir, if I may be so bold as to ask?" continued Job.

"His words were few enough, and he was so reserved and short, that
as I said before, I can only give you the impression they conveyed
to me. I told him of course who I was, and for what I was sent. He
looked pleased, I thought,--at least his face (sad enough when I went
in, I assure ye) brightened a little; but he said he had nothing to
say, no defence to make. I asked him if he was guilty, then; and by
way of opening his heart I said I understood he had had provocation
enough, inasmuch as I heard that the girl was very lovely, and had
jilted him to fall desperately in love with that handsome young
Carson (poor fellow!). But James Wilson did not speak one way or
another. I then went to particulars. I asked him if the gun was his,
as his mother had declared. He had not heard of her admission it was
evident, from his quick way of looking up, and the glance of his eye;
but when he saw I was observing him, he hung down his head again, and
merely said she was right; it was his gun."

"Well!" said Job, impatiently, as Mr. Bridgenorth paused.

"Nay! I have little more to tell you," continued that gentleman. "I
asked him to inform me in all confidence, how it came to be found
there. He was silent for a time, and then refused. Not only refused
to answer that question, but candidly told me he would not say
another word on the subject, and, thanking me for my trouble and
interest in his behalf, he all but dismissed me. Ungracious enough on
the whole, was it not, Mr. Legh? And yet, I assure ye, I am twenty
times more inclined to think him innocent than before I had the
interview."

"I wish Mary Barton would come," said Job, anxiously. "She and Will
are a long time about it."

"Ay, that's our only chance, I believe," answered Mr. Bridgenorth,
who was writing again. "I sent Johnson off before twelve to serve him
with his sub-poena, and to say I wanted to speak with him; he'll be
here soon, I've no doubt."

There was a pause. Mr. Bridgenorth looked up again, and spoke.

"Mr. Duncombe promised to be here to speak to his character. I sent
him a subpoena on Saturday night. Though after all, juries go very
little by such general and vague testimony as that to character.
It is very right that they should not often; but in this instance
unfortunate for us, as we must rest our case on the _alibi_."

The pen went again, scratch, scratch over the paper.

Job grew very fidgetty. He sat on the edge of his chair, the more
readily to start up when Will and Mary should appear. He listened
intently to every noise and every step on the stair.

Once he heard a man's footstep, and his old heart gave a leap of
delight. But it was only Mr. Bridgenorth's clerk, bringing him a
list of those cases in which the grand jury had found true bills.
He glanced it over and pushed it to Job, merely saying,

"Of course we expected this," and went on with his writing.

There was a true bill against James Wilson. Of course. And yet Job
felt now doubly anxious and sad. It seemed the beginning of the end.
He had got, by imperceptible degrees, to think Jem innocent. Little
by little this persuasion had come upon him.

Mary (tossing about in the little boat on the broad river) did not
come, nor did Will.

Job grew very restless. He longed to go and watch for them out of the
window, but feared to interrupt Mr. Bridgenorth. At length his desire
to look out was irresistible, and he got up and walked carefully and
gently across the room, his boots creaking at every cautious step.
The gloom which had overspread the sky, and the influence of which
had been felt by Mary on the open water, was yet more perceptible
in the dark, dull street. Job grew more and more fidgetty. He was
obliged to walk about the room, for he could not keep still; and he
did so, regardless of Mr. Bridgenorth's impatient little motions
and noises, as the slow, stealthy, creaking movements were heard,
backwards and forwards, behind his chair.

He really liked Job, and was interested for Jem, else his nervousness
would have overcome his sympathy long before it did. But he could
hold out no longer against the monotonous, grating sound; so at last
he threw down his pen, locked his portfolio, and taking up his hat
and gloves, he told Job he must go to the courts.

"But Will Wilson is not come," said Job, in dismay. "Just wait while
I run to his lodgings. I would have done it before, but I thought
they'd be here every minute, and I were afraid of missing them. I'll
be back in no time."

"No, my good fellow, I really must go. Besides, I begin to think
Johnson must have made a mistake, and have fixed with this William
Wilson to meet me at the courts. If you like to wait for him here,
pray make use of my room; but I've a notion I shall find him there:
in which case, I'll send him to your lodgings; shall I? You know
where to find me. I shall be here again by eight o'clock, and with
the evidence of this witness that's to prove the _alibi_, I'll have
the brief drawn out, and in the hands of counsel to-night."

So saying he shook hands with Job, and went his way. The old man
considered for a minute as he lingered at the door, and then bent
his steps towards Mrs. Jones's, where he knew (from reference to
queer, odd, heterogeneous memoranda, in an ancient black-leather
pocket-book) that Will lodged, and where he doubted not he should
hear both of him and of Mary.

He went there, and gathered what intelligence he could out of Mrs.
Jones's slow replies.

He asked if a young woman had been there that morning, and if she had
seen Will Wilson. "No!"

"Why not?"

"Why, bless you, 'cause he had sailed some hours before she came
asking for him."

There was a dead silence, broken only by the even, heavy sound of
Mrs. Jones's ironing.

"Where is the young woman now?" asked Job.

"Somewhere down at the docks," she thought. "Charley would know, if
he was in, but he wasn't. He was in mischief, somewhere or other, she
had no doubt. Boys always were. He would break his neck some day, she
knew;" so saying, she quietly spat upon her fresh iron, to test its
heat, and then went on with her business.

Job could have boxed her, he was in such a state of irritation. But
he did not, and he had his reward. Charley came in, whistling with
an air of indifference, assumed to carry off his knowledge of the
lateness of the hour to which he had lingered about the docks.

"Here's an old man come to know where the young woman is who went out
with thee this morning," said his mother, after she had bestowed on
him a little motherly scolding.

"Where she is now, I don't know. I saw her last sailing down the
river after the _John Cropper_. I'm afeared she won't reach her; wind
changed and she would be under weigh, and over the bar in no time.
She should have been back by now."

It took Job some little time to understand this, from the confused
use of the feminine pronoun. Then he inquired how he could best find
Mary.

"I'll run down again to the pier," said the boy; "I'll warrant I'll
find her."

"Thou shalt do no such a thing," said his mother, setting her back
against the door. The lad made a comical face at Job, which met with
no responsive look from the old man, whose sympathies were naturally
in favour of the parent; although he would thankfully have availed
himself of Charley's offer, for he was weary, and anxious to return
to poor Mrs. Wilson, who would be wondering what had become of him.

"How can I best find her? Who did she go with, lad?"

But Charley was sullen at his mother's exercise of authority before
a stranger, and at that stranger's grave looks when he meant to have
made him laugh.

"They were river boatmen;--that's all I know," said he.

"But what was the name of their boat?" persevered Job.

"I never took no notice;--the Anne, or William,--or some of them
common names, I'll be bound."

"What pier did she start from?" asked Job, despairingly.

"Oh, as for that matter, it were the stairs on the Prince's Pier she
started from; but she'll not come back to the same, for the American
steamer came up with the tide, and anchored close to it, blocking up
the way for all the smaller craft. It's a rough evening too, to be
out on," he maliciously added.

"Well, God's will be done! I did hope we could have saved the lad,"
said Job, sorrowfully; "but I'm getten very doubtful again. I'm
uneasy about Mary, too,--very. She's a stranger in Liverpool."

"So she told me," said Charley. "There's traps about for young women
at every corner. It's a pity she's no one to meet her when she
lands."

"As for that," replied Job, "I don't see how any one could meet her
when we can't tell where she would come to. I must trust to her
coming right. She's getten spirit and sense. She'll most likely be
for coming here again. Indeed, I don't know what else she can do, for
she knows no other place in Liverpool. Missus, if she comes, will
you give your son leave to bring her to No. 8, Back Garden Court,
where there's friends waiting for her? I'll give him sixpence for his
trouble."

Mrs. Jones, pleased with the reference to her, gladly promised. And
even Charley, indignant as he was at first at the idea of his motions
being under the control of his mother, was mollified at the prospect
of the sixpence, and at the probability of getting nearer to the
heart of the mystery.

But Mary never came.




CHAPTER XXX.

JOB LEGH'S DECEPTION.


   "Poor Susan moans, poor Susan groans;
     The clock gives warning for eleven;
   'Tis on the stroke--'He must be near,'
   Quoth Betty, 'and will soon be here,
     As sure as there's a moon in heaven.'

   The clock is on the stroke of twelve,
     And Johnny is not yet in sight,
   --The moon's in heaven, as Betty sees,
   But Betty is not quite at ease;
     And Susan has a dreadful night."

   WORDSWORTH.


Job found Mrs. Wilson pacing about in a restless way; not speaking to
the woman at whose house she was staying, but occasionally heaving
such deep oppressive sighs as quite startled those around her.

"Well!" said she, turning sharp round in her tottering walk up and
down, as Job came in.

"Well, speak!" repeated she, before he could make up his mind what to
say; for, to tell the truth, he was studying for some kind-hearted
lie which might soothe her for a time. But now the real state of the
case came blurting forth in answer to her impatient questioning.

"Will's not to the fore. But he'll may be turn up yet, time enough."

She looked at him steadily for a minute, as if almost doubting if
such despair could be in store for her as his words seemed to imply.
Then she slowly shook her head, and said, more quietly than might
have been expected from her previous excited manner,

"Don't go for to say that! Thou dost not think it. Thou'rt well-nigh
hopeless, like me. I seed all along my lad would be hung for what
he never did. And better he were, and were shut [49] of this weary
world, where there's neither justice nor mercy left."


   [Footnote 49: "Shut," quit.]


She looked up with tranced eyes as if praying to that throne where
mercy ever abideth, and then sat down.

"Nay, now thou'rt off at a gallop," said Job. "Will has sailed this
morning for sure, but that brave wench, Mary Barton, is after him,
and will bring him back, I'll be bound, if she can but get speech on
him. She's not back yet. Come, come, hold up thy head. It will all
end right."

"It will all end right," echoed she; "but not as thou tak'st it. Jem
will be hung, and will go to his father and the little lads, where
the Lord God wipes away all tears, and where the Lord Jesus speaks
kindly to the little ones, who look about for the mothers they left
upon earth. Eh, Job, yon's a blessed land, and I long to go to it,
and yet I fret because Jem is hastening there. I would not fret if
he and I could lie down to-night to sleep our last sleep; not a bit
would I fret if folk would but know him to be innocent--as I do."

"They'll know it sooner or later, and repent sore if they've hanged
him for what he never did," replied Job.

"Ay, that they will. Poor souls! May God have mercy on them when they
find out their mistake."

Presently Job grew tired of sitting waiting, and got up, and hung
about the door and window, like some animal wanting to go out. It was
pitch dark, for the moon had not yet risen.

"You just go to bed," said he to the widow. "You'll want your
strength for to-morrow. Jem will be sadly off, if he sees you so cut
up as you look to-night. I'll step down again and find Mary. She'll
be back by this time. I'll come and tell you every thing, never fear.
But, now, you go to bed."

"Thou'rt a kind friend, Job Legh, and I'll go, as thou wishest me.
But, oh! mind thou com'st straight off to me, and bring Mary as soon
as thou'st lit on her." She spoke low, but very calmly.

"Ay, ay!" replied Job, slipping out of the house.

He went first to Mr. Bridgenorth's, where it had struck him that Will
and Mary might be all this time waiting for him.

They were not there, however. Mr. Bridgenorth had just come in, and
Job went breathlessly up-stairs to consult with him as to the state
of the case.

"It's a bad job," said the lawyer, looking very grave, while he
arranged his papers. "Johnson told me how it was; the woman that
Wilson lodged with told him. I doubt it's but a wild-goose chase
of the girl Barton. Our case must rest on the uncertainty of
circumstantial evidence, and the goodness of the prisoner's previous
character. A very vague and weak defence. However, I've engaged Mr.
Clinton as counsel, and he'll make the best of it. And now, my good
fellow, I must wish you good-night, and turn you out of doors. As it
is, I shall have to sit up into the small hours. Did you see my clerk
as you came up-stairs? You did! Then may I trouble you to ask him to
step up immediately?"

After this Job could not stay, and, making his humble bow, he left
the room.

Then he went to Mrs. Jones's. She was in, but Charley had slipped off
again. There was no holding that boy. Nothing kept him but lock and
key, and they did not always; for once she had him locked up in the
garret, and he had got off through the skylight. Perhaps now he was
gone to see after the young woman down at the docks. He never wanted
an excuse to be there.

Unasked, Job took a chair, resolved to await Charley's re-appearance.

Mrs. Jones ironed and folded her clothes, talking all the time of
Charley and her husband, who was a sailor in some ship bound for
India, and who, in leaving her their boy, had evidently left her
rather more than she could manage. She moaned and croaked over
sailors, and sea-port towns, and stormy weather, and sleepless
nights, and trousers all over tar and pitch, long after Job had left
off attending to her, and was only trying to hearken to every step
and every voice in the street.

At last Charley came in, but he came alone.

"Yon Mary Barton has getten into some scrape or another," said he,
addressing himself to Job. "She's not to be heard of at any of the
piers; and Bourne says it were a boat from the Cheshire side as she
went aboard of. So there's no hearing of her till to-morrow morning."

"To-morrow morning she'll have to be in court at nine o'clock, to
bear witness on a trial," said Job, sorrowfully.

"So she said; at least somewhat of the kind," said Charley, looking
desirous to hear more. But Job was silent.

He could not think of any thing further that could be done; so he
rose up, and, thanking Mrs. Jones for the shelter she had given him,
he went out into the street; and there he stood still, to ponder over
probabilities and chances.

After some little time he slowly turned towards the lodging where
he had left Mrs. Wilson. There was nothing else to be done; but he
loitered on the way, fervently hoping that her weariness and her woes
might have sent her to sleep before his return, that he might be
spared her questionings.

He went very gently into the house-place where the sleepy landlady
awaited his coming and his bringing the girl, who, she had been told,
was to share the old woman's bed.

But in her sleepy blindness she knocked things so about in lighting
the candle (she could see to have a nap by fire-light, she said),
that the voice of Mrs. Wilson was heard from the little back-room,
where she was to pass the night.

"Who's there?"

Job gave no answer, and kept down his breath, that she might think
herself mistaken. The landlady, having no such care, dropped the
snuffers with a sharp metallic sound, and then, by her endless
apologies, convinced the listening woman that Job had returned.

"Job! Job Legh!" she cried out, nervously.

"Eh, dear!" said Job to himself, going reluctantly to her bed-room
door. "I wonder if one little lie would be a sin as things stand? It
would happen give her sleep, and she won't have sleep for many and
many a night (not to call sleep), if things goes wrong to-morrow.
I'll chance it, any way."

"Job! art thou there?" asked she again with a trembling impatience
that told in every tone of her voice.

"Ay! sure! I thought thou'd ha' been asleep by this time."

"Asleep! How could I sleep till I knowed if Will were found?"

"Now for it," muttered Job to himself. Then in a louder voice, "Never
fear! he's found, and safe, ready for to-morrow."

"And he'll prove that thing for my poor lad, will he? He'll bear
witness that Jem were with him? Oh, Job, speak! tell me all!"

"In for a penny, in for a pound," thought Job. "Happen one prayer
will do for the sum total. Any rate, I must go on now.--Ay, ay,"
shouted he, through the door. "He can prove all; and Jem will come
off as clear as a new-born babe."

He could hear Mrs. Wilson's rustling movements, and in an instant
guessed she was on her knees, for he heard her trembling voice
uplifted in thanksgiving and praise to God, stopped at times by sobs
of gladness and relief.

And when he heard this, his heart misgave him; for he thought of the
awful enlightening, the terrible revulsion of feeling that awaited
her in the morning. He saw the short-sightedness of falsehood; but
what could he do now?

While he listened, she ended her grateful prayers.

"And Mary? Thou'st found her at Mrs. Jones's, Job?" said she,
continuing her inquiries.

He gave a great sigh.

"Yes, she was there, safe enough, second time of going.--God forgive
me!" muttered he, "who'd ha' thought of my turning out such an arrant
liar in my old days?"

"Bless the wench! Is she here? Why does she not come to bed? I'm sure
she's need."

Job coughed away his remains of conscience, and made answer,

"She was a bit weary, and o'er done with her sail; and Mrs. Jones
axed her to stay there all night. It was nigh at hand to the courts,
where she will have to be in the morning."

"It comes easy enough after a while," groaned out Job. "The father
of lies helps one, I suppose, for now my speech comes as natural as
truth. She's done questioning now, that's one good thing. I'll be off
before Satan and she are at me again."

He went to the house-place, where the landlady stood wearily waiting.
Her husband was in bed, and asleep long ago.

But Job had not yet made up his mind what to do. He could not go to
sleep, with all his anxieties, if he were put into the best bed in
Liverpool.

"Thou'lt let me sit up in this arm-chair," said he at length to the
woman, who stood, expecting his departure.

He was an old friend, so she let him do as he wished. But, indeed,
she was too sleepy to have opposed him. She was too glad to be
released and go to bed.




CHAPTER XXXI.

HOW MARY PASSED THE NIGHT.


                           "To think
   That all this long interminable night,
   Which I have passed in thinking on two words--
   'Guilty'--'Not Guilty!'--like one happy moment
   O'er many a head hath flown unheeded by;
   O'er happy sleepers dreaming in their bliss
   Of bright to-morrows--or far happier still,
   With deep breath buried in forgetfulness.
   O all the dismallest images of death
   Did swim before my eyes!"

   WILSON.


And now, where was Mary?

How Job's heart would have been relieved of one of its cares if he
could have seen her: for he was in a miserable state of anxiety about
her; and many and many a time through that long night he scolded her
and himself; her for her obstinacy, and himself for his weakness in
yielding to her obstinacy, when she insisted on being the one to
follow and find out Will.

She did not pass that night in bed any more than Job; but she was
under a respectable roof, and among kind, though rough people.

She had offered no resistance to the old boatman, when he had
clutched her arm, in order to insure her following him, as he
threaded the crowded dock-ways, and dived up strange bye-streets. She
came on meekly after him, scarcely thinking in her stupor where she
was going, and glad (in a dead, heavy way) that some one was deciding
things for her.

He led her to an old-fashioned house, almost as small as house could
be, which had been built long ago, before all the other part of
the street, and had a country-town look about it in the middle of
that bustling back street. He pulled her into the house-place; and
relieved to a certain degree of his fear of losing her on the way, he
exclaimed,

"There!" giving a great slap of one hand on her back.

The room was light and bright, and roused Mary (perhaps the slap on
her back might help a little, too), and she felt the awkwardness
of accounting for her presence to a little bustling old woman who
had been moving about the fire-place on her entrance. The boatman
took it very quietly, never deigning to give any explanation, but
sitting down in his own particular chair, and chewing tobacco, while
he looked at Mary with the most satisfied air imaginable, half
triumphantly, as if she were the captive of his bow and spear, and
half defyingly, as if daring her to escape.

The old woman, his wife, stood still, poker in hand, waiting to be
told who it was that her husband had brought home so unceremoniously;
but, as she looked in amazement the girl's cheek flushed, and then
blanched to a dead whiteness; a film came over her eyes, and catching
at the dresser for support in that hot whirling room, she fell in a
heap on the floor.

Both man and wife came quickly to her assistance. They raised her up,
still insensible, and he supported her on one knee, while his wife
pattered away for some cold fresh water. She threw it straight over
Mary; but though it caused a great sob, the eyes still remained
closed, and the face as pale as ashes.

"Who is she, Ben?" asked the woman, as she rubbed her unresisting,
powerless hands.

"How should I know?" answered her husband gruffly.

"Well-a-well!" (in a soothing tone, such as you use to irritated
children), and as if half to herself, "I only thought you might, you
know, as you brought her home. Poor thing! we must not ask aught
about her, but that she needs help. I wish I'd my salts at home, but
I lent 'em to Mrs. Burton, last Sunday in church, for she could not
keep awake through the sermon. Dear-a-me, how white she is!"

"Here! you hold her up a bit," said her husband.

She did as he desired, still crooning to herself, not caring for his
short, sharp interruptions as she went on; and, indeed, to her old,
loving heart, his crossest words fell like pearls and diamonds, for
he had been the husband of her youth; and even he, rough and crabbed
as he was, was secretly soothed by the sound of her voice, although
not for worlds, if he could have helped it, would he have shown any
of the love that was hidden beneath his rough outside.

"What's the old fellow after?" said she, bending over Mary, so as to
accommodate the drooping head. "Taking my pen, as I've had better
nor five year. Bless us, and save us! he's burning it! Ay, I see now,
he's his wits about him; burnt feathers is always good for a faint.
But they don't bring her round, poor wench! Now what's he after
next? Well! he is a bright one, my old man! That I never thought of
that, to be sure!" exclaimed she, as he produced a square bottle of
smuggled spirits, labelled "Golden Wasser," from a corner cupboard in
their little room.

"That'll do!" said she, as the dose he poured into Mary's open mouth
made her start and cough. "Bless the man! It's just like him to be so
tender and thoughtful!"

"Not a bit!" snarled he, as he was relieved by Mary's returning
colour, and opened eyes, and wondering, sensible gaze; "not a bit!
I never was such a fool afore."

His wife helped Mary to rise, and placed her in a chair.

"All's right now, young woman?" asked the boatman, anxiously.

"Yes, sir, and thank you. I'm sure, sir, I don't know rightly how to
thank you," faltered Mary, softly forth.

"Be hanged to you and your thanks." And he shook himself, took his
pipe, and went out without deigning another word; leaving his wife
sorely puzzled as to the character and history of the stranger within
her doors.

Mary watched the boatman leave the house, and then, turning her
sorrowful eyes to the face of her hostess, she attempted feebly to
rise, with the intention of going away,--where she knew not.

"Nay! nay! who e'er thou be'st, thou'rt not fit to go out into the
street. Perhaps" (sinking her voice a little) "thou'rt a bad one; I
almost misdoubt thee, thou'rt so pretty. Well-a-well! it's the bad
ones as have the broken hearts, sure enough; good folk never get
utterly cast down, they've always getten hope in the Lord: it's the
sinful as bear the bitter, bitter grief in their crushed hearts, poor
souls; it's them we ought, most of all, to pity and to help. She
shanna leave the house to-night, choose who she is,--worst woman in
Liverpool, she shanna. I wished I knew where th' old man picked her
up, that I do."

Mary had listened feebly to this soliloquy, and now tried to satisfy
her hostess in weak, broken sentences.

"I'm not a bad one, missis, indeed. Your master took me out to sea
after a ship as had sailed. There was a man in it as might save a
life at the trial to-morrow. The captain would not let him come, but
he says he'll come back in the pilot-boat." She fell to sobbing at
the thought of her waning hopes, and the old woman tried to comfort
her, beginning with her accustomed,

"Well-a-well! and he'll come back, I'm sure. I know he will; so keep
up your heart. Don't fret about it. He's sure to be back."

"Oh! I'm afraid! I'm sore afraid he won't," cried Mary, consoled,
nevertheless, by the woman's assertions, all groundless as she knew
them to be.

Still talking half to herself and half to Mary, the old woman
prepared tea, and urged her visitor to eat and refresh herself. But
Mary shook her head at the proffered food, and only drank a cup of
tea with thirsty eagerness. For the spirits had thrown her into a
burning heat, and rendered each impression received through her
senses of the most painful distinctness and intensity, while her head
ached in a terrible manner.

She disliked speaking, her power over her words seemed so utterly
gone. She used quite different expressions to those she intended. So
she kept silent, while Mrs. Sturgis (for that was the name of her
hostess) talked away, and put her tea-things by, and moved about
incessantly, in a manner that increased the dizziness in Mary's head.
She felt as if she ought to take leave for the night and go. But
where?

Presently the old man came back, crosser and gruffer than when he
went away. He kicked aside the dry shoes his wife had prepared for
him, and snarled at all she said. Mary attributed this to his finding
her still there, and gathered up her strength for an effort to leave
the house. But she was mistaken. By-and-bye, he said (looking right
into the fire, as if addressing it), "Wind's right against them!"

"Ay, ay, and is it so?" said his wife, who, knowing him well,
knew that his surliness proceeded from some repressed sympathy.
"Well-a-well, wind changes often at night. Time enough before
morning. I'd bet a penny it has changed sin' thou looked."

She looked out of their little window at a weather-cock, near,
glittering in the moonlight; and as she was a sailor's wife, she
instantly recognised the unfavourable point at which the indicator
seemed stationary, and giving a heavy sigh, turned into the room, and
began to beat about in her own mind for some other mode of comfort.

"There's no one else who can prove what you want at the trial
to-morrow, is there?" asked she.

"No one!" answered Mary.

"And you've no clue to the one as is really guilty, if t'other is
not?"

Mary did not answer, but trembled all over.

Sturgis saw it.

"Don't bother her with thy questions," said he to his wife. "She mun
go to bed, for she's all in a shiver with the sea air. I'll see after
the wind, hang it, and the weather-cock, too. Tide will help 'em when
it turns."

Mary went up-stairs murmuring thanks and blessings on those who took
the stranger in. Mrs. Sturgis led her into a little room redolent of
the sea and foreign lands. There was a small bed for one son, bound
for China; and a hammock slung above for another, who was now tossing
in the Baltic. The sheets looked made out of sail-cloth, but were
fresh and clean in spite of their brownness.

Against the wall were wafered two rough drawings of vessels with
their names written underneath, on which the mother's eyes caught,
and gazed until they filled with tears. But she brushed the drops
away with the back of her hand, and in a cheerful tone went on to
assure Mary the bed was well aired.

"I cannot sleep, thank you. I will sit here, if you please," said
Mary, sinking down on the window-seat.

"Come, now," said Mrs. Sturgis, "my master told me to see you to bed,
and I mun. What's the use of watching? A watched pot never boils, and
I see you are after watching that weather-cock. Why now, I try never
to look at it, else I could do nought else. My heart many a time goes
sick when the wind rises, but I turn away and work away, and try
never to think on the wind, but on what I ha' getten to do."

"Let me stay up a little," pleaded Mary, as her hostess seemed so
resolute about seeing her to bed. Her looks won her suit.

"Well, I suppose I mun. I shall catch it down stairs, I know. He'll
be in a fidget till you're getten to bed, I know; so you mun be quiet
if you are so bent upon staying up."

And quietly, noiselessly, Mary watched the unchanging weather-cock
through the night. She sat on the little window-seat, her hand
holding back the curtain which shaded the room from the bright
moonlight without; her head resting its weariness against the corner
of the window-frame; her eyes burning and stiff with the intensity of
her gaze.

The ruddy morning stole up the horizon, casting a crimson glow into
the watcher's room.

It was the morning of the day of trial!




CHAPTER XXXII.

THE TRIAL AND VERDICT--"NOT GUILTY."


            "Thou stand'st here arraign'd,
   That, with presumption impious and accursed,
   Thou hast usurp'd God's high prerogative,
   Making thy fellow mortal's life and death
   Wait on thy moody and diseased passions;
   That with a violent and untimely steel
   Hast set abroach the blood that should have ebbed
   In calm and natural current: to sum all
   In one wild name--a name the pale air freezes at,
   And every cheek of man sinks in with horror--
   Thou art a cold and midnight murderer."

   MILMAN'S "FAZIO."


Of all the restless people who found that night's hours agonising
from excess of anxiety, the poor father of the murdered man was
perhaps the most restless. He had slept but little since the blow had
fallen; his waking hours had been too full of agitated thought, which
seemed to haunt and pursue him through his unquiet slumbers.

And this night of all others was the most sleepless. He turned over
and over again in his mind the wonder if every thing had been done
that could be done, to insure the conviction of Jem Wilson. He almost
regretted the haste with which he had urged forward the proceedings,
and yet until he had obtained vengeance, he felt as if there was no
peace on earth for him (I don't know that he exactly used the term
vengeance in his thoughts; he spoke of justice, and probably thought
of his desired end as such); no peace either bodily or mental, for
he moved up and down his bedroom with the restless incessant tramp
of a wild beast in a cage, and if he compelled his aching limbs to
cease for an instant, the twitchings which ensued almost amounted to
convulsions, and he re-commenced his walk as the lesser evil, and the
more bearable fatigue.

With daylight increased power of action came; and he drove off to
arouse his attorney, and worry him with further directions and
inquiries; and when that was ended, he sat, watch in hand, until the
courts should be opened, and the trial begin.

What were all the living,--wife or daughters,--what were they in
comparison with the dead,--the murdered son who lay unburied still,
in compliance with his father's earnest wish, and almost vowed
purpose of having the slayer of his child sentenced to death, before
he committed the body to the rest of the grave?

At nine o'clock they all met at their awful place of _rendezvous_.

The judge, the jury, the avenger of blood, the prisoner, the
witnesses--all were gathered together within one building. And
besides these were many others, personally interested in some part
of the proceedings, in which, however, they took no part; Job Legh,
Ben Sturgis, and several others were there, amongst whom was Charley
Jones.

Job Legh had carefully avoided any questioning from Mrs. Wilson that
morning. Indeed he had not been much in her company, for he had risen
up early to go out once more to make inquiry for Mary; and when
he could hear nothing of her, he had desperately resolved not to
undeceive Mrs. Wilson, as sorrow never came too late; and if the blow
were inevitable, it would be better to leave her in ignorance of
the impending evil as long as possible. She took her place in the
witness-room, worn and dispirited, but not anxious.

As Job struggled through the crowd into the body of the court, Mr.
Bridgenorth's clerk beckoned to him.

"Here's a letter for you from our client!"

Job sickened as he took it. He did not know why, but he dreaded a
confession of guilt, which would be an overthrow of all hope.

The letter ran as follows.


   DEAR FRIEND,--I thank you heartily for your goodness in
   finding me a lawyer, but lawyers can do no good to me,
   whatever they may do to other people. But I am not the
   less obliged to you, dear friend. I foresee things will go
   against me--and no wonder. If I was a jury-man, I should
   say the man was guilty as had as much evidence brought
   against him as may be brought against me to-morrow. So
   it's no blame to them if they do. But, Job Legh, I think I
   need not tell you I am as guiltless in this matter as the
   babe unborn, although it is not in my power to prove it.
   If I did not believe that you thought me innocent, I could
   not write as I do now to tell you my wishes. You'll not
   forget they are the wishes of a man shortly to die. Dear
   friend, you must take care of my mother. Not in the money
   way, for she will have enough for her and Aunt Alice; but
   you must let her talk to you of me; and show her that
   (whatever others may do) you think I died innocent. I
   don't reckon she will stay long behind when we are all
   gone. Be tender with her, Job, for my sake; and if she
   is a bit fractious at times, remember what she has gone
   through. I know mother will never doubt me, God bless her.

   There is one other whom I fear I have loved too dearly;
   and yet, the loving her has made the happiness of my life.
   She will think I have murdered her lover; she will think
   I have caused the grief she must be feeling. And she must
   go on thinking so. It is hard upon me to say this; but she
   _must_. It will be best for her, and that's all I ought
   to think on. But, dear Job, you are a hearty fellow for
   your time of life, and may live a many years to come; and
   perhaps you could tell her, when you felt sure you were
   drawing near your end, that I solemnly told you (as I do
   now) that I was innocent of this thing. You must not tell
   her for many years to come; but I cannot well bear to
   think on her living through a long life, and hating the
   thought of me as the murderer of him she loved, and dying
   with that hatred to me in her heart. It would hurt me sore
   in the other world to see the look of it in her face, as
   it would be, till she was told. I must not let myself
   think on how she must be viewing me now. So God bless you,
   Job Legh; and no more from

   Yours to command,

   JAMES WILSON.


Job turned the letter over and over when he had read it; sighed
deeply; and then wrapping it carefully up in a bit of newspaper he
had about him, he put it in his waistcoat pocket, and went off to
the door of the witness-room to ask if Mary Barton were there.

As the door opened he saw her sitting within, against a table on
which her folded arms were resting, and her head was hidden within
them. It was an attitude of hopelessness, and would have served to
strike Job dumb in sickness of heart, even without the sound of Mrs.
Wilson's voice in passionate sobbing, and sore lamentations, which
told him as well as words could do (for she was not within view of
the door, and he did not care to go in), that she was at any rate
partially undeceived as to the hopes he had given her last night.

Sorrowfully did Job return into the body of the court; neither Mrs.
Wilson nor Mary having seen him as he had stood at the witness-room
door.

As soon as he could bring his distracted thoughts to bear upon the
present scene, he perceived that the trial of James Wilson for the
murder of Henry Carson was just commencing. The clerk was gabbling
over the indictment, and in a minute or two there was the accustomed
question, "How say you, Guilty, or Not Guilty?"

Although but one answer was expected,--was customary in all
cases,--there was a pause of dead silence, an interval of solemnity
even in this hackneyed part of the proceeding; while the prisoner at
the bar stood with compressed lips, looking at the judge with his
outward eyes, but with far other and different scenes presented
to his mental vision;--a sort of rapid recapitulation of his
life,--remembrances of his childhood,--his father (so proud of him,
his first-born child),--his sweet little playfellow, Mary,--his
hopes, his love,--his despair, yet still, yet ever and ever, his
love,--the blank, wide world it had been without her love,--his
mother,--his childless mother,--but not long to be so,--not long to
be away from all she loved,--nor during that time to be oppressed
with doubt as to his innocence, sure and secure of her darling's
heart;--he started from his instant's pause, and said in a low firm
voice,

"Not guilty, my lord."

The circumstances of the murder, the discovery of the body, the
causes of suspicion against Jem, were as well known to most of
the audience as they are to you, so there was some little buzz of
conversation going on among the people while the leading counsel for
the prosecution made his very effective speech.

"That's Mr. Carson, the father, sitting behind Serjeant Wilkinson!"

"What a noble-looking old man he is! so stern and inflexible, with
such classical features! Does he not remind you of some of the busts
of Jupiter?"

"I am more interested by watching the prisoner. Criminals always
interest me. I try to trace in the features common to humanity some
expression of the crimes by which they have distinguished themselves
from their kind. I have seen a good number of murderers in my day,
but I have seldom seen one with such marks of Cain on his countenance
as the man at the bar."

"Well, I am no physiognomist, but I don't think his face strikes me
as bad. It certainly is gloomy and depressed, and not unnaturally so,
considering his situation."

"Only look at his low, resolute brow, his downcast eye, his white
compressed lips. He never looks up,--just watch him."

"His forehead is not so low if he had that mass of black hair
removed, and is very square, which some people say is a good sign.
If others are to be influenced by such trifles as you are, it would
have been much better if the prison barber had cut his hair a little
previous to the trial; and as for down-cast eye, and compressed lip,
it is all part and parcel of his inward agitation just now; nothing
to do with character, my good fellow."

Poor Jem! His raven hair (his mother's pride, and so often fondly
caressed by her fingers), was that too to have its influence against
him?

The witnesses were called. At first they consisted principally of
policemen; who, being much accustomed to giving evidence, knew what
were the material points they were called on to prove, and did not
lose the time of the court in listening to any thing unnecessary.

"Clear as day against the prisoner," whispered one attorney's clerk
to another.

"Black as night, you mean," replied his friend; and they both smiled.

"Jane Wilson! who's she? some relation, I suppose, from the name."

"The mother,--she that is to prove the gun part of the case."

"Oh, ay--I remember! Rather hard on her, too, I think."

Then both were silent, as one of the officers of the court ushered
Mrs. Wilson into the witness-box. I have often called her "the old
woman," and "an old woman," because, in truth, her appearance was
so much beyond her years, which might not be many above fifty. But
partly owing to her accident in early life, which left a stamp of
pain upon her face, partly owing to her anxious temper, partly to
her sorrows, and partly to her limping gait, she always gave me the
idea of age. But now she might have seemed more than seventy; her
lines were so set and deep, her features so sharpened, and her walk
so feeble. She was trying to check her sobs into composure, and
(unconsciously) was striving to behave as she thought would best
please her poor boy, whom she knew she had often grieved by her
uncontrolled impatience. He had buried his face in his arms, which
rested on the front of the dock (an attitude he retained during the
greater part of his trial, and which prejudiced many against him).

The counsel began the examination.

"Your name is Jane Wilson, I believe."

"Yes, sir."

"The mother of the prisoner at the bar?"

"Yes, sir;" with quivering voice, ready to break out into weeping,
but earning respect by the strong effort at self-control, prompted,
as I have said before, by her earnest wish to please her son by her
behaviour.

The barrister now proceeded to the important part of the examination,
tending to prove that the gun found on the scene of the murder was
the prisoner's. She had committed herself so fully to the policeman,
that she could not well retract; so without much delay in bringing
the question round to the desired point, the gun was produced in
court, and the inquiry made--

"That gun belongs to your son, does it not?"

She clenched the sides of the witness-box in her efforts to make her
parched tongue utter words. At last she moaned forth,

"Oh! Jem, Jem! what mun I say?"

Every one bent forward to hear the prisoner's answer; although, in
fact, it was of little importance to the issue of the trial. He
lifted up his head; and with a face brimming full of pity for his
mother, yet resolved into endurance, said,

"Tell the truth, mother!"

And so she did, with the fidelity of a little child. Every one felt
that she did; and the little colloquy between mother and son did them
some slight service in the opinion of the audience. But the awful
judge sat unmoved; and the jurymen changed not a muscle of their
countenances; while the counsel for the prosecution went triumphantly
through this part of the case, including the fact of Jem's absence
from home on the night of the murder, and bringing every admission to
bear right against the prisoner.

It was over. She was told to go down. But she could no longer compel
her mother's heart to keep silence, and suddenly turning towards
the judge (with whom she imagined the verdict to rest), she thus
addressed him with her choking voice.

"And now, sir, I've telled you the truth, and the whole truth, as
_he_ bid me; but don't ye let what I have said go for to hang him;
oh, my lord judge, take my word for it, he's as innocent as the
child as has yet to be born. For sure, I, who am his mother, and
have nursed him on my knee, and been gladdened by the sight of him
every day since, ought to know him better than yon pack of fellows"
(indicating the jury, while she strove against her heart to render
her words distinct and clear for her dear son's sake) "who, I'll go
bail, never saw him before this morning in all their born days. My
lord judge, he's so good I often wondered what harm there was in him;
many is the time when I've been fretted (for I'm frabbit enough at
times), when I've scold't myself, and said, 'You ungrateful thing,
the Lord God has given you Jem, and isn't that blessing enough for
you?' But He has seen fit to punish me. If Jem is--if Jem is--taken
from me, I shall be a childless woman; and very poor, having nought
left to love on earth, and I cannot say 'His will be done.' I cannot,
my lord judge, oh, I cannot."

While sobbing out these words she was led away by the officers of the
court, but tenderly, and reverently, with the respect which great
sorrow commands.

The stream of evidence went on and on, gathering fresh force from
every witness who was examined, and threatening to overwhelm poor
Jem. Already they had proved that the gun was his, that he had been
heard not many days before the commission of the deed to threaten the
deceased; indeed, that the police had, at that time, been obliged to
interfere to prevent some probable act of violence. It only remained
to bring forward a sufficient motive for the threat and the murder.
The clue to this had been furnished by the policeman, who had
overheard Jem's angry language to Mr. Carson; and his report in the
first instance had occasioned the subpoena to Mary.

And now she was to be called on to bear witness. The court was by
this time almost as full as it could hold; but fresh attempts were
being made to squeeze in at all the entrances, for many were anxious
to see and hear this part of the trial.

Old Mr. Carson felt an additional beat at his heart at the thought of
seeing the fatal Helen, the cause of all--a kind of interest and yet
repugnance, for was not she beloved by the dead; nay, perhaps in her
way, loving and mourning for the same being that he himself was so
bitterly grieving over? And yet he felt as if he abhorred her and her
rumoured loveliness, as if she were the curse against him; and he
grew jealous of the love with which she had inspired his son, and
would fain have deprived her of even her natural right of sorrowing
over her lover's untimely end: for you see it was a fixed idea
in the minds of all, that the handsome, bright, gay, rich young
gentleman must have been beloved in preference to the serious, almost
stern-looking smith, who had to toil for his daily bread.

Hitherto the effect of the trial had equalled Mr. Carson's most
sanguine hopes, and a severe look of satisfaction came over the face
of the avenger,--over that countenance whence the smile had departed,
never more to return.

All eyes were directed to the door through which the witnesses
entered. Even Jem looked up to catch one glimpse before he hid his
face from her look of aversion. The officer had gone to fetch her.

She was in exactly the same attitude as when Job Legh had seen her
two hours before through the half-open door. Not a finger had moved.
The officer summoned her, but she did not stir. She was so still he
thought she had fallen asleep, and he stepped forward and touched
her. She started up in an instant, and followed him with a kind of
rushing rapid motion into the court, into the witness-box.

And amid all that sea of faces, misty and swimming before her eyes,
she saw but two clear bright spots, distinct and fixed: the judge,
who might have to condemn; and the prisoner, who might have to die.

The mellow sunlight streamed down that high window on her head, and
fell on the rich treasure of her golden hair, stuffed away in masses
under her little bonnet-cap; and in those warm beams the motes kept
dancing up and down. The wind had changed--had changed almost as
soon as she had given up her watching; the wind had changed, and she
heeded it not.

Many who were looking for mere flesh and blood beauty, mere
colouring, were disappointed; for her face was deadly white, and
almost set in its expression, while a mournful bewildered soul
looked out of the depths of those soft, deep, gray eyes. But others
recognised a higher and stranger kind of beauty; one that would keep
its hold on the memory for many after years.

I was not there myself; but one who was, told me that her look, and
indeed her whole face, was more like the well-known engraving from
Guido's picture of "Beatrice Cenci" than any thing else he could give
me an idea of. He added, that her countenance haunted him, like the
remembrance of some wild sad melody, heard in childhood; that it
would perpetually recur with its mute imploring agony.

With all the court reeling before her (always save and except those
awful two), she heard a voice speak, and answered the simple inquiry
(something about her name) mechanically, as if in a dream. So she
went on for two or three more questions, with a strange wonder in her
brain, as to the reality of the terrible circumstances in which she
was placed.

Suddenly she was roused, she knew not how or by what. She was
conscious that all was real, that hundreds were looking at her, that
true-sounding words were being extracted from her; that that figure,
so bowed down, with the face concealed by both hands, was really Jem.
Her face flushed scarlet, and then paler than before. But in her
dread of herself, with the tremendous secret imprisoned within her,
she exerted every power she had to keep in the full understanding of
what was going on, of what she was asked, and of what she answered.
With all her faculties preternaturally alive and sensitive, she heard
the next question from the pert young barrister, who was delighted to
have the examination of this witness.

"And pray, may I ask, which was the favoured lover? You say you knew
both these young men. Which was the favoured lover? Which did you
prefer?"

And who was he, the questioner, that he should dare so lightly to
ask of her heart's secrets? That he should dare to ask her to tell,
before that multitude assembled there, what woman usually whispers
with blushes and tears, and many hesitations, to one ear alone?

So, for an instant, a look of indignation contracted Mary's brow,
as she steadily met the eyes of the impertinent counsellor. But, in
that instant, she saw the hands removed from a face beyond, behind;
and a countenance revealed of such intense love and woe,--such a
deprecating dread of her answer; and suddenly her resolution was
taken. The present was everything; the future, that vast shroud, it
was maddening to think upon; but _now_ she might own her fault, but
_now_ she might even own her love. Now, when the beloved stood thus,
abhorred of men, there would be no feminine shame to stand between
her and her avowal. So she also turned towards the judge, partly
to mark that her answer was not given to the monkeyfied man who
questioned her, and likewise that her face might be averted from, and
her eyes not gaze upon, the form that contracted with the dread of
the words he anticipated.

"He asks me which of them two I liked the best. Perhaps I liked Mr.
Harry Carson once--I don't know--I've forgotten; but I loved James
Wilson, that's now on trial, above what tongue can tell--above all
else on earth put together; and I love him now better than ever,
though he has never known a word of it till this minute. For you see,
sir, mother died before I was thirteen, before I could know right
from wrong about some things; and I was giddy and vain, and ready to
listen to any praise of my good looks; and this poor young Mr. Carson
fell in with me, and told me he loved me; and I was foolish enough
to think he meant me marriage: a mother is a pitiful loss to a girl,
sir; and so I used to fancy I could like to be a lady, and rich,
and never know want any more. I never found out how dearly I loved
another till one day, when James Wilson asked me to marry him, and
I was very hard and sharp in my answer (for indeed, sir, I'd a deal
to bear just then), and he took me at my word and left me; and from
that day to this I've never spoken a word to him, or set eyes on him;
though I'd fain have done so, to try and show him we had both been
too hasty; for he'd not been gone out of my sight above a minute
before I knew I loved--far above my life," said she, dropping her
voice as she came to this second confession of the strength of her
attachment. "But, if the gentleman asks me which I loved the best,
I make answer, I was flattered by Mr. Carson, and pleased with his
flattery; but James Wilson I--"

She covered her face with her hands, to hide the burning scarlet
blushes, which even dyed her fingers.

There was a little pause; still, though her speech might inspire pity
for the prisoner, it only strengthened the supposition of his guilt.
Presently the counsellor went on with his examination.

"But you have seen young Mr. Carson since your rejection of the
prisoner?"

"Yes, often."

"You have spoken to him, I conclude, at these times."

"Only once to call speaking."

"And what was the substance of your conversation? Did you tell him
you found you preferred his rival?"

"No, sir. I don't think as I've done wrong in saying, now as things
stand, what my feelings are; but I never would be so bold as to tell
one young man I cared for another. I never named Jem's name to Mr.
Carson. Never."

"Then what did you say when you had this final conversation with Mr.
Carson? You can give me the substance of it, if you don't remember
the words."

"I'll try, sir; but I'm not very clear. I told him I could not love
him, and wished to have nothing more to do with him. He did his best
to over-persuade me, but I kept steady, and at last I ran off."

"And you never spoke to him again?"

"Never!"

"Now, young woman, remember you are upon your oath. Did you ever tell
the prisoner at the bar of Mr. Henry Carson's attentions to you? of
your acquaintance, in short? Did you ever try to excite his jealousy
by boasting of a lover so far above you in station?"

"Never. I never did," said she, in so firm and distinct a manner as
to leave no doubt.

"Were you aware that he knew of Mr. Henry Carson's regard for you?
Remember you are on your oath!"

"Never, sir. I was not aware until I heard of the quarrel between
them, and what Jem had said to the policeman, and that was after the
murder. To this day I can't make out who told Jem. Oh, sir, may not
I go down?"

For she felt the sense, the composure, the very bodily strength which
she had compelled to her aid for a time, suddenly giving way, and was
conscious that she was losing all command over herself. There was no
occasion to detain her longer; she had done her part. She might go
down. The evidence was still stronger against the prisoner; but now
he stood erect and firm, with self-respect in his attitude, and a
look of determination on his face, which almost made it appear noble.
Yet he seemed lost in thought.

Job Legh had all this time been trying to soothe and comfort Mrs.
Wilson, who would first be in the court, in order to see her darling,
and then, when her sobs became irrepressible, had to be led out into
the open air, and sat there weeping, on the steps of the court-house.
Who would have taken charge of Mary on her release from the
witness-box I do not know, if Mrs. Sturgis, the boatman's wife, had
not been there, brought by her interest in Mary, towards whom she now
pressed, in order to urge her to leave the scene of the trial.

"No! no!" said Mary, to this proposition. "I must be here, I must
watch that they don't hang him, you know I must."

"Oh! they'll not hang him! never fear! Besides the wind has changed,
and that's in his favour. Come away. You're so hot, and first white
and then red; I'm sure you're ill. Just come away."

"Oh! I don't know about any thing but that I must stay," replied
Mary, in a strange hurried manner, catching hold of some rails as if
she feared some bodily force would be employed to remove her. So Mrs.
Sturgis just waited patiently by her, every now and then peeping
among the congregation of heads in the body of the court, to see if
her husband were still there. And there he always was to be seen,
looking and listening with all his might. His wife felt easy that he
would not be wanting her at home until the trial was ended.

Mary never let go her clutched hold on the rails. She wanted them to
steady her, in that heaving, whirling court. She thought the feeling
of something hard compressed within her hand would help her to
listen, for it was such pain, such weary pain in her head, to strive
to attend to what was being said. They were all at sea, sailing away
on billowy waves, and every one speaking at once, and no one heeding
her father, who was calling on them to be silent, and listen to him.
Then again, for a brief second, the court stood still, and she could
see the judge, sitting up there like an idol, with his trappings, so
rigid and stiff; and Jem, opposite, looking at her, as if to say, Am
I to die for what you know your ----. Then she checked herself, and
by a great struggle brought herself round to an instant's sanity.
But the round of thought never stood still; and off she went again;
and every time her power of struggling against the growing delirium
grew fainter and fainter. She muttered low to herself, but no one
heard her except her neighbour, Mrs. Sturgis; all were too closely
attending to the case for the prosecution, which was now being wound
up.

The counsel for the prisoner had avoided much cross-examination,
reserving to himself the right of calling the witnesses forward
again; for he had received so little, and such vague instructions,
and understood that so much depended on the evidence of one who was
not forthcoming, that in fact he had little hope of establishing any
thing like a show of a defence, and contented himself with watching
the case, and lying in wait for any legal objections that might
offer themselves. He lay back on the seat, occasionally taking a
pinch of snuff in a manner intended to be contemptuous; now and then
elevating his eyebrows, and sometimes exchanging a little note with
Mr. Bridgenorth behind him. The attorney had far more interest in the
case than the barrister, to which he was perhaps excited by his poor
old friend Job Legh; who had edged and wedged himself through the
crowd close to Mr. Bridgenorth's elbow, sent thither by Ben Sturgis,
to whom he had been "introduced" by Charley Jones, and who had
accounted for Mary's disappearance on the preceding day, and spoken
of their chase, their fears, their hopes.

All this was told in a few words to Mr. Bridgenorth--so few, that
they gave him but a confused idea, that time was of value; and this
he named to his counsel, who now rose to speak for the defence.

Job Legh looked about for Mary, now he had gained, and given, some
idea of the position of things. At last he saw her, standing by a
decent-looking woman, looking flushed and anxious, and moving her
lips incessantly, as if eagerly talking; her eyes never resting on
any object, but wandering about as if in search of something. Job
thought it was for him she was seeking, and he struggled to get round
to her. When he had succeeded, she took no notice of him, although
he spoke to her, but still kept looking round and round in the same
wild, restless manner. He tried to hear the low quick mutterings of
her voice, as he caught the repetition of the same words over and
over again.

"I must not go mad. I must not, indeed. They say people tell the
truth when they're mad; but I don't. I was always a liar. I was,
indeed; but I'm not mad. I must not go mad. I must not, indeed."

Suddenly she seemed to become aware how earnestly Job was listening
(with mournful attention) to her words, and turning sharp round upon
him, with upbraiding for his eaves-dropping on her lips, she caught
sight of something,--or some one,--who, even in that state, had power
to arrest her attention, and throwing up her arms with wild energy,
she shrieked aloud,

"Oh, Jem! Jem! you're saved; and I _am_ mad--" and was instantly
seized with convulsions. With much commiseration she was taken out
of court, while the attention of many was diverted from her, by the
fierce energy with which a sailor forced his way over rails and
seats, against turnkeys and policemen. The officers of the court
opposed this forcible manner of entrance, but they could hardly
induce the offender to adopt any quieter way of attaining his object,
and telling his tale in the witness-box, the legitimate place. For
Will had dwelt so impatiently on the danger in which his absence
would place his cousin, that even yet he seemed to fear that he might
see the prisoner carried off, and hung, before he could pour out the
narrative which would exculpate him. As for Job Legh, his feelings
were all but uncontrollable; as you may judge by the indifference
with which he saw Mary borne, stiff and convulsed, out of the court,
in the charge of the kind Mrs. Sturgis, who, you will remember, was
an utter stranger to him.

"She'll keep! I'll not trouble myself about her," said he to himself,
as he wrote with trembling hands a little note of information to Mr.
Bridgenorth, who had conjectured, when Will had first disturbed the
awful tranquillity of the life-and-death court, that the witness had
arrived (better late than never) on whose evidence rested all the
slight chance yet remaining to Jem Wilson of escaping death. During
the commotion in the court, among all the cries and commands, the
dismay and the directions, consequent upon Will's entrance, and
poor Mary's fearful attack of illness, Mr. Bridgenorth had kept his
lawyer-like presence of mind; and long before Job Legh's almost
illegible note was poked at him, he had recapitulated the facts on
which Will had to give evidence, and the manner in which he had been
pursued, after his ship had taken her leave of the land.

The barrister who defended Jem took new heart when he was put in
possession of these striking points to be adduced, not so much out
of earnestness to save the prisoner, of whose innocence he was still
doubtful, as because he saw the opportunities for the display of
forensic eloquence which were presented by the facts; "a gallant tar
brought back from the pathless ocean by a girl's noble daring," "the
dangers of too hastily judging from circumstantial evidence," &c.,
&c.; while the counsellor for the prosecution prepared himself by
folding his arms, elevating his eyebrows, and putting his lips in the
form in which they might best whistle down the wind such evidence
as might be produced by a suborned witness, who dared to perjure
himself. For, of course, it is etiquette to suppose that such
evidence as may be given against the opinion which lawyers are
paid to uphold, is any thing but based on truth; and "perjury,"
"conspiracy," and "peril of your immortal soul," are light
expressions to throw at the heads of those who may prove (not the
speaker, there would then be some excuse for the hasty words of
personal anger, but) the hirer of the speaker to be wrong, or
mistaken.

But when once Will had attained his end, and felt that his tale,
or part of a tale, would be heard by judge and jury; when once he
saw Jem standing safe and well before him (even though he saw him
pale and care-worn at the felon's bar); his courage took the shape
of presence of mind, and he awaited the examination with a calm,
unflinching intelligence, which dictated the clearest and most
pertinent answers. He told the story you know so well: how his
leave of absence being nearly expired, he had resolved to fulfil
his promise, and go to see an uncle residing in the Isle of Man;
how his money (sailor-like) was all expended in Manchester, and how,
consequently, it had been necessary for him to walk to Liverpool,
which he had accordingly done on the very night of the murder,
accompanied as far as Hollins Greeb by his friend and cousin, the
prisoner at the bar. He was clear and distinct in every corroborative
circumstance, and gave a short account of the singular way in which
he had been recalled from his outward-bound voyage, and the terrible
anxiety he had felt, as the pilot-boat had struggled home against
the wind. The jury felt that their opinion (so nearly decided half
an hour ago) was shaken and disturbed in a very uncomfortable and
perplexing way, and were almost grateful to the counsel for the
prosecution, when he got up, with a brow of thunder, to demolish
the evidence, which was so bewildering when taken in connexion with
every thing previously adduced. But if such, without looking to the
consequences, was the first impulsive feeling of some among the jury,
how shall I describe the vehemence of passion which possessed the
mind of poor Mr. Carson, as he saw the effect of the young sailor's
statement? It never shook his belief in Jem's guilt in the least,
that attempt at an alibi; his hatred, his longing for vengeance,
having once defined an object to itself, could no more bear to be
frustrated and disappointed than the beast of prey can submit to have
his victim taken from his hungry jaws. No more likeness to the calm
stern power of Jupiter was there in that white eager face, almost
distorted by its fell anxiety of expression.

The counsel to whom etiquette assigned the cross-examination of Will,
caught the look on Mr. Carson's face, and in his desire to further
the intense wish there manifested, he over-shot his mark even in his
first insulting question:

"And now, my man, you've told the court a very good and very
convincing story; no reasonable man ought to doubt the unstained
innocence of your relation at the bar. Still there is one
circumstance you have forgotten to name; and I feel that without
it your evidence is rather incomplete. Will you have the kindness
to inform the gentlemen of the jury what has been your charge for
repeating this very plausible story? How much good coin of Her
Majesty's realm have you received, or are you to receive, for walking
up from the docks, or some less creditable place, and uttering the
tale you have just now repeated,--very much to the credit of your
instructor, I must say? Remember, sir, you are upon oath."

It took Will a minute to extract the meaning from the garb of
unaccustomed words in which it was invested, and during this time he
looked a little confused. But the instant the truth flashed upon him,
he fixed his bright clear eyes, flaming with indignation, upon the
counsellor, whose look fell at last before that stern unflinching
gaze. Then, and not till then, Will made answer.

"Will you tell the judge and jury how much money you've been paid for
your impudence towards one who has told God's blessed truth, and who
would scorn to tell a lie, or blackguard any one, for the biggest fee
as ever lawyer got for doing dirty work? Will you tell, sir?-- But
I'm ready, my lord judge, to take my oath as many times as your
lordship or the jury would like, to testify to things having happened
just as I said. There's O'Brien, the pilot, in court now. Would
somebody with a wig on please to ask him how much he can say for me?"

It was a good idea, and caught at by the counsel for the defence.
O'Brien gave just such testimony as was required to clear Will
from all suspicion. He had witnessed the pursuit, he had heard the
conversation which took place between the boat and the ship; he had
given Will a homeward passage in his boat. And the character of an
accredited pilot, appointed by Trinity House, was known to be above
suspicion.

Mr. Carson sank back on his seat in sickening despair. He knew enough
of courts to be aware of the extreme unwillingness of juries to
convict, even where the evidence is most clear, when the penalty
of such conviction is death. At the period of the trial most
condemnatory to the prisoner, he had repeated this fact to himself
in order to damp his too certain expectation of a conviction. Now it
needed not repetition, for it forced itself upon his consciousness,
and he seemed to _know_, even before the jury retired to consult,
that by some trick, some negligence, some miserable hocus-pocus,
the murderer of his child, his darling, his Absalom, who had never
rebelled,--the slayer of his unburied boy would slip through the
fangs of justice, and walk free and unscathed over that earth where
his son would never more be seen.

It was even so. The prisoner hid his face once more to shield the
expression of an emotion he could not control, from the notice of the
over-curious; Job Legh ceased his eager talking to Mr. Bridgenorth;
Charley looked grave and earnest; for the jury filed one by one back
into their box, and the question was asked to which such an awful
answer might be given.

The verdict they had come to was unsatisfactory to themselves at
last; neither being convinced of his innocence, nor yet quite willing
to believe him guilty in the teeth of the alibi. But the punishment
that awaited him, if guilty, was so terrible, and so unnatural a
sentence for man to pronounce on man, that the knowledge of it had
weighed down the scale on the side of innocence, and "Not Guilty" was
the verdict that thrilled through the breathless court.

One moment of silence, and then the murmurs rose, as the verdict was
discussed by all with lowered voice. Jem stood motionless, his head
bowed; poor fellow, he was stunned with the rapid career of events
during the last few hours.

He had assumed his place at the bar with little or no expectation
of an acquittal; and with scarcely any desire for life, in the
complication of occurrences tending to strengthen the idea of Mary's
more than indifference to him; she had loved another, and in her mind
Jem believed that he himself must be regarded as the murderer of him
she loved. And suddenly, athwart this gloom which made life seem such
a blank expanse of desolation, there flashed the exquisite delight
of hearing Mary's avowal of love, making the future all glorious, if
a future in this world he might hope to have. He could not dwell on
any thing but her words, telling of her passionate love; all else was
indistinct, nor could he strive to make it otherwise. She loved him.

And Life, now full of tender images, suddenly bright with all
exquisite promises, hung on a breath, the slenderest gossamer chance.
He tried to think that the knowledge of her love would soothe him
even in his dying hours; but the phantoms of what life with her
might be, would obtrude, and made him almost gasp and reel under the
uncertainty he was enduring. Will's appearance had only added to the
intensity of this suspense.

The full meaning of the verdict could not at once penetrate his
brain. He stood dizzy and motionless. Some one pulled his coat. He
turned, and saw Job Legh, the tears stealing down his brown furrowed
cheeks, while he tried in vain to command voice enough to speak. He
kept shaking Jem by the hand as the best and necessary expression of
his feeling.

"Here! make yourself scarce! I should think you'd be glad to get
out of that!" exclaimed the gaoler, as he brought up another livid
prisoner, from out whose eyes came the anxiety which he would not
allow any other feature to display.

Job Legh pressed out of court, and Jem followed unreasoningly.

The crowd made way, and kept their garments tight about them, as Jem
passed, for about him there still hung the taint of the murderer.

He was in the open air, and free once more! Although many looked on
him with suspicion, faithful friends closed round him; his arm was
unresistingly pumped up and down by his cousin and Job; when one
was tired, the other took up the wholesome exercise, while Ben
Sturgis was working off his interest in the scene by scolding Charley
for walking on his head round and round Mary's sweetheart, for a
sweetheart he was now satisfactorily ascertained to be, in spite of
her assertion to the contrary. And all this time Jem himself felt
bewildered and dazzled; he would have given any thing for an hour's
uninterrupted thought on the occurrences of the past week, and the
new visions raised up during the morning; aye, even though that
tranquil hour were to be passed in the hermitage of his quiet prison
cell. The first question sobbed out by his choking voice, oppressed
with emotion, was,

"Where is she?"

They led him to the room where his mother sat. They had told her
of her son's acquittal, and now she was laughing, and crying,
and talking, and giving way to all those feelings which she had
restrained with such effort during the last few days. They brought
her son to her, and she threw herself upon his neck, weeping there.
He returned her embrace, but looked around, beyond. Excepting his
mother there was no one in the room but the friends who had entered
with him.

"Eh, lad!" said she, when she found voice to speak. "See what it is
to have behaved thysel! I could put in a good word for thee, and the
jury could na go and hang thee in the face of th' character I gave
thee. Was na it a good thing they did na keep me from Liverpool? But
I would come; I knew I could do thee good, bless thee, my lad. But
thou'rt very white, and all of a tremble."

He kissed her again and again, but looking round as if searching for
some one he could not find, the first words he uttered were still,

"Where is she?"




CHAPTER XXXIII.

REQUIESCAT IN PACE.


   "Fear no more the heat o' th' sun,
     Nor the furious winter's rages;
   Thou thy worldly task hast done,
     Home art gone and ta'en thy wages."

   CYMBELINE.

   "While day and night can bring delight,
     Or nature aught of pleasure give;
   While joys above my mind can move
     For thee, and thee alone I live:

   "When that grim foe of joy below
     Comes in between to make us part,
   The iron hand that breaks our band,
     It breaks my bliss--it breaks my heart."

   BURNS.


She was where no words of peace, no soothing hopeful tidings could
reach her; in the ghastly spectral world of delirium. Hour after
hour, day after day, she started up with passionate cries on her
father to save Jem; or rose wildly, imploring the winds and waves,
the pitiless winds and waves, to have mercy; and over and over
again she exhausted her feverish fitful strength in these agonised
entreaties, and fell back powerless, uttering only the wailing moans
of despair. They told her Jem was safe, they brought him before her
eyes; but sight and hearing were no longer channels of information to
that poor distracted brain, nor could human voice penetrate to her
understanding.

Jem alone gathered the full meaning of some of her strange sentences,
and perceived that by some means or other she, like himself, had
divined the truth of her father being the murderer.

Long ago (reckoning time by events and thoughts, and not by clock
or dial-plate), Jem had felt certain that Mary's father was Harry
Carson's murderer; and although the motive was in some measure a
mystery, yet a whole train of circumstances (the principal of which
was that John Barton had borrowed the fatal gun only two days before)
had left no doubt in Jem's mind. Sometimes he thought that John had
discovered, and thus bloodily resented, the attentions which Mr.
Carson had paid to his daughter; at others, he believed the motive to
exist in the bitter feuds between the masters and their work-people,
in which Barton was known to take so keen an interest. But if he had
felt himself pledged to preserve this secret, even when his own life
was the probable penalty, and he believed he should fall, execrated
by Mary as the guilty destroyer of her lover, how much more was he
bound now to labour to prevent any word of hers from inculpating her
father, now that she was his own; now that she had braved so much
to rescue him; and now that her poor brain had lost all guiding and
controlling power over her words.

All that night long Jem wandered up and down the narrow precincts
of Ben Sturgis's house. In the little bed-room where Mrs. Sturgis
alternately tended Mary, and wept over the violence of her illness,
he listened to her ravings; each sentence of which had its own
peculiar meaning and reference, intelligible to his mind, till her
words rose to the wild pitch of agony, that no one could alleviate,
and he could bear it no longer, and stole, sick and miserable down
stairs, where Ben Sturgis thought it his duty to snore away in an
arm-chair instead of his bed, under the idea that he should thus be
more ready for active service, such as fetching the doctor to revisit
his patient.

Before it was fairly light, Jem (wide-awake, and listening with an
earnest attention he could not deaden, however painful its results
proved) heard a gentle subdued knock at the house door; it was no
business of his, to be sure, to open it, but as Ben slept on, he
thought he would see who the early visitor might be, and ascertain
if there was any occasion for disturbing either host or hostess. It
was Job Legh who stood there, distinct against the outer light of the
street.

"How is she? Eh! poor soul! is that her! no need to ask! How strange
her voice sounds! Screech! screech! and she so low, sweet-spoken,
when she's well! Thou must keep up heart, old boy, and not look so
dismal, thysel."

"I can't help it, Job; it's past a man's bearing to hear such a one
as she is, going on as she is doing; even if I did not care for her,
it would cut me sore to see one so young, and--I can't speak of it,
Job, as a man should do," said Jem, his sobs choking him.

"Let me in, will you?" said Job, pushing past him, for all this time
Jem had stood holding the door, unwilling to admit Job where he might
hear so much that would be suggestive to one acquainted with the
parties that Mary named.

"I'd more than one reason for coming betimes. I wanted to hear how
yon poor wench was;--that stood first. Late last night I got a letter
from Margaret, very anxious-like. The doctor says the old lady yonder
can't last many days longer, and it seems so lonesome for her to die
with no one but Margaret and Mrs. Davenport about her. So I thought
I'd just come and stay with Mary Barton, and see as she's well done
to, and you and your mother and Will go and take leave of old Alice."

Jem's countenance, sad at best just now, fell lower and lower. But
Job went on with his speech.

"She still wanders, Margaret says, and thinks she's with her mother
at home; but for all that, she should have some kith and kin near her
to close her eyes, to my thinking."

"Could not you and Will take mother home? I'd follow when--" Jem
faltered out thus far, when Job interrupted,

"Lad! if thou knew what thy mother has suffered for thee, thou'd
not speak of leaving her just when she's got thee from the grave
as it were. Why, this very night she roused me up, and 'Job,' says
she, 'I ask your pardon for wakening you, but tell me, am I awake or
dreaming? Is Jem proved innocent? Oh, Job Legh! God send I've not
been only dreaming it!' For thou see'st she can't rightly understand
why thou'rt with Mary, and not with her. Ay, ay! I know why; but a
mother only gives up her son's heart inch by inch to his wife, and
then she gives it up with a grudge. No, Jem! thou must go with thy
mother just now, if ever thou hopest for God's blessing. She's a
widow, and has none but thee. Never fear for Mary! She's young and
will struggle through. They are decent people, these folk she is
with, and I'll watch o'er her as though she was my own poor girl,
that lies cold enough in London-town. I grant ye, it's hard enough
for her to be left among strangers. To my mind John Barton would
be more in the way of his duty, looking after his daughter, than
delegating it up and down the country, looking after every one's
business but his own."

A new idea and a new fear came into Jem's mind. What if Mary should
implicate her father?

"She raves terribly," said he. "All night long she's been speaking
of her father, and mixing up thoughts of him with the trial she saw
yesterday. I should not wonder if she'll speak of him as being in
court next thing."

"I should na wonder, either," answered Job. "Folk in her way say many
and many a strange thing; and th' best way is never to mind them. Now
you take your mother home, Jem, and stay by her till old Alice is
gone, and trust me for seeing after Mary."

Jem felt how right Job was, and could not resist what he knew to be
his duty, but I cannot tell you how heavy and sick at heart he was
as he stood at the door to take a last fond, lingering look at Mary.
He saw her sitting up in bed, her golden hair, dimmed with her one
day's illness, floating behind her, her head bound round with wetted
cloths, her features all agitated, even to distortion, with the pangs
of her anxiety.

Her lover's eyes filled with tears. He could not hope. The elasticity
of his heart had been crushed out of him by early sorrows; and now,
especially, the dark side of every thing seemed to be presented to
him. What if she died, just when he knew the treasure, the untold
treasure he possessed in her love! What if (worse than death) she
remained a poor gibbering maniac all her life long (and mad people
do live to be old sometimes, even under all the pressure of their
burden), terror-distracted as she was now, and no one able to comfort
her!

"Jem!" said Job, partly guessing the other's feelings by his own.
"Jem!" repeated he, arresting his attention before he spoke. Jem
turned round, the little motion causing the tears to overflow and
trickle down his cheeks. "Thou must trust in God, and leave her in
His hands." He spoke hushed, and low; but the words sank all the more
into Jem's heart, and gave him strength to tear himself away.

He found his mother (notwithstanding that she had but just regained
her child through Mary's instrumentality) half inclined to resent his
having passed the night in anxious devotion to the poor invalid. She
dwelt on the duties of children to their parents (above all others),
till Jem could hardly believe the relative positions they had held
only yesterday, when she was struggling with and controlling every
instinct of her nature, only because _he_ wished it. However, the
recollection of that yesterday, with its hair's breadth between him
and a felon's death, and the love that had lightened the dark shadow,
made him bear with the meekness and patience of a true-hearted man
all the worrying little acerbities of to-day; and he had no small
merit in so doing; for in him, as in his mother, the re-action after
intense excitement had produced its usual effect in increased
irritability of the nervous system.

They found Alice alive, and without pain. And that was all. A child
of a few weeks old would have had more bodily strength; a child of a
very few months old, more consciousness of what was passing before
her. But even in this state she diffused an atmosphere of peace
around her. True, Will, at first, wept passionate tears at the sight
of her, who had been as a mother to him, so standing on the confines
of life. But even now, as always, loud passionate feeling could not
long endure in the calm of her presence. The firm faith which her
mind had no longer power to grasp, had left its trail of glory; for
by no other word can I call the bright happy look which illumined the
old earth-worn face. Her talk, it is true, bore no more that constant
earnest reference to God and His holy Word which it had done in
health, and there were no death-bed words of exhortation from the
lips of one so habitually pious. For still she imagined herself once
again in the happy, happy realms of childhood; and again dwelling
in the lovely northern haunts where she had so often longed to be.
Though earthly sight was gone away, she beheld again the scenes she
had loved from long years ago! she saw them without a change to dim
the old radiant hues. The long dead were with her, fresh and blooming
as in those bygone days. And death came to her as a welcome blessing,
like as evening comes to the weary child. Her work here was finished,
and faithfully done.

What better sentence can an emperor wish to have said over his bier?
In second childhood (that blessing clouded by a name), she said her
"Nunc Dimittis,"--the sweetest canticle to the holy.

"Mother, good night! Dear mother! bless me once more! I'm very tired,
and would fain go to sleep." She never spoke again on this side
Heaven.

She died the day after their return from Liverpool. From that time,
Jem became aware that his mother was jealously watching for some word
or sign which should betoken his wish to return to Mary. And yet go
to Liverpool he must and would, as soon as the funeral was over, if
but for a single glimpse of his darling. For Job had never written;
indeed, any necessity for his so doing had never entered his head.
If Mary died, he would announce it personally; if she recovered, he
meant to bring her home with him. Writing was to him little more than
an auxiliary to natural history; a way of ticketing specimens, not of
expressing thoughts.

The consequence of this want of intelligence as to Mary's state was,
that Jem was constantly anticipating that every person and every
scrap of paper was to convey to him the news of her death. He could
not endure this state long; but he resolved not to disturb the house
by announcing to his mother his purposed intention of returning to
Liverpool, until the dead had been carried forth.

On Sunday afternoon they laid her low with many tears. Will wept as
one who would not be comforted.

The old childish feeling came over him, the feeling of loneliness at
being left among strangers.

By and bye, Margaret timidly stole near him, as if waiting to
console; and soon his passion sank down to grief, and grief gave way
to melancholy, and though he felt as if he never could be joyful
again, he was all the while unconsciously approaching nearer to the
full happiness of calling Margaret his own, and a golden thread was
interwoven even now with the darkness of his sorrow. Yet it was on
his arm that Jane Wilson leant on her return homewards. Jem took
charge of Margaret.

"Margaret, I'm bound for Liverpool by the first train to-morrow; I
must set your grandfather at liberty."

"I'm sure he likes nothing better than watching over poor Mary; he
loves her nearly as well as me. But let me go! I have been so full
of poor Alice, I've never thought of it before; I can't do so much
as many a one, but Mary will like to have a woman about her that she
knows. I'm sorry I waited to be reminded, Jem." replied Margaret,
with some little self-reproach.

But Margaret's proposition did not at all agree with her companion's
wishes. He found he had better speak out, and put his intention at
once to the right motive; the subterfuge about setting Job Legh at
liberty had done him harm instead of good.

"To tell truth, Margaret, it's I that must go, and that for my own
sake, not your grandfather's. I can rest neither by night nor day for
thinking on Mary. Whether she lives or dies I look on her as my wife
before God, as surely and solemnly as if we were married. So being, I
have the greatest right to look after her, and I cannot yield it even
to--"

"Her father," said Margaret, finishing his interrupted sentence. "It
seems strange that a girl like her should be thrown on the bare world
to struggle through so bad an illness. No one seems to know where
John Barton is, else I thought of getting Morris to write him a
letter telling him about Mary. I wish he was home, that I do!"

Jem could not echo this wish.

"Mary's not bad off for friends where she is," said he. "I call them
friends, though a week ago we none of us knew there were such folks
in the world. But being anxious and sorrowful about the same thing
makes people friends quicker than any thing, I think. She's like a
mother to Mary in her ways; and he bears a good character, as far as
I could learn just in that hurry. We're drawing near home, and I've
not said my say, Margaret. I want you to look after mother a bit.
She'll not like my going, and I've got to break it to her yet. If she
takes it very badly, I'll come back to-morrow night; but if she's not
against it very much, I mean to stay till it's settled about Mary,
one way or the other. Will, you know, will be there, Margaret, to
help a bit in doing for mother."

Will's being there made the only objection Margaret saw to this plan.
She disliked the idea of seeming to throw herself in his way; and yet
she did not like to say any thing of this feeling to Jem, who had all
along seemed perfectly unconscious of any love-affair, besides his
own, in progress.

So Margaret gave a reluctant consent.

"If you can just step up to our house to-night, Jem, I'll put up a
few things as may be useful to Mary, and then you can say when you'll
likely be back. If you come home to-morrow night, and Will's there,
perhaps I need not step up?"

"Yes, Margaret, do! I shan't leave easy unless you go some time in
the day to see mother. I'll come to-night, though; and now good-bye.
Stay! do you think you could just coax poor Will to walk a bit home
with you, that I might speak to mother by myself?"

No! that Margaret could not do. That was expecting too great a
sacrifice of bashful feeling.

But the object was accomplished by Will's going up-stairs immediately
on their return to the house, to indulge his mournful thoughts alone.
As soon as Jem and his mother were left by themselves, he began on
the subject uppermost in his mind.

"Mother!"

She put her handkerchief from her eyes, and turned quickly round so
as to face him where he stood, thinking what best to say. The little
action annoyed him, and he rushed at once into the subject.

"Mother! I am going back to Liverpool to-morrow morning to see how
Mary Barton is."

"And what's Mary Barton to thee, that thou shouldst be running after
her in that-a-way?"

"If she lives, she shall be my wedded wife. If she dies--mother, I
can't speak of what I shall feel if she dies." His voice was choked
in his throat.

For an instant his mother was interested by his words; and then came
back the old jealousy of being supplanted in the affections of that
son, who had been, as it were, newly born to her, by the escape he
had so lately experienced from danger. So she hardened her heart
against entertaining any feeling of sympathy; and turned away from
the face, which recalled the earnest look of his childhood, when he
had come to her in some trouble, sure of help and comfort.

And coldly she spoke, in those tones which Jem knew and dreaded, even
before the meaning they expressed was fully shaped. "Thou'rt old
enough to please thysel. Old mothers are cast aside, and what they've
borne forgotten, as soon as a pretty face comes across. I might have
thought of that last Tuesday, when I felt as if thou wert all my own,
and the judge were some wild animal trying to rend thee from me. I
spoke up for thee then; but it's all forgotten now, I suppose."

"Mother! you know all this while, _you know_ I can never forget any
kindness you've ever done for me; and they've been many. Why should
you think I've only room for one love in my heart? I can love you as
dearly as ever, and Mary too, as much as man ever loved woman."

He awaited a reply. None was vouchsafed.

"Mother, answer me!" said he, at last.

"What mun I answer? You asked me no question."

"Well! I ask you this now. To-morrow morning I go to Liverpool to see
her, who is as my wife. Dear mother! will you bless me on my errand?
If it please God she recovers, will you take her to you as you would
a daughter?"

She could neither refuse nor assent.

"Why need you go?" said she querulously, at length. "You'll be
getting in some mischief or another again. Can't you stop at home
quiet with me?"

Jem got up, and walked about the room in despairing impatience. She
would not understand his feelings. At last he stopped right before
the place where she was sitting, with an air of injured meekness on
her face.

"Mother! I often think what a good man father was! I've often heard
you tell of your courting days; and of the accident that befell you,
and how ill you were. How long is it ago?"

"Near upon five-and-twenty years," said she, with a sigh.

"You little thought when you were so ill you should live to have such
a fine strapping son as I am, did you now?"

She smiled a little, and looked up at him, which was just what he
wanted.

"Thou'rt not so fine a man as thy father was, by a deal!" said she,
looking at him with much fondness, notwithstanding her depreciatory
words.

He took another turn or two up and down the room. He wanted to bend
the subject round to his own case.

"Those were happy days when father was alive!"

"You may say so, lad! Such days as will never come again to me, at
any rate." She sighed sorrowfully.

"Mother!" said he at last, stopping short, and taking her hand in
his with tender affection, "you'd like me to be as happy a man as my
father was before me, would not you? You'd like me to have some one
to make me as happy as you made father? Now, would you not, dear
mother?"

"I did not make him as happy as I might ha' done," murmured she, in
a low, sad voice of self-reproach. "Th' accident gave a jar to my
temper it's never got the better of; and now he's gone where he can
never know how I grieve for having frabbed him as I did."

"Nay, mother, we don't know that!" said Jem, with gentle soothing.
"Any how, you and father got along with as few rubs as most people.
But for _his_ sake, dear mother, don't say me nay, now that I come to
you to ask your blessing before setting out to see her, who is to be
my wife, if ever woman is; for _his_ sake, if not for mine, love her
who I shall bring home to be to me all you were to him: and mother! I
do not ask for a truer or a tenderer heart than yours is, in the long
run."

The hard look left her face; though her eyes were still averted
from Jem's gaze, it was more because they were brimming over with
tears, called forth by his words, than because any angry feeling yet
remained. And when his manly voice died away in low pleadings, she
lifted up her hands, and bent down her son's head below the level of
her own; and then she solemnly uttered a blessing.

"God bless thee, Jem, my own dear lad. And may He bless Mary Barton
for thy sake."

Jem's heart leaped up, and from this time hope took the place of fear
in his anticipations with regard to Mary.

"Mother! you show your own true self to Mary, and she'll love you as
dearly as I do."

So with some few smiles, and some few tears, and much earnest
talking, the evening wore away.

"I must be off to see Margaret. Why, it's near ten o'clock! Could you
have thought it? Now don't you stop up for me, mother. You and Will
go to bed, for you've both need of it. I shall be home in an hour."

Margaret had felt the evening long and lonely; and was all but giving
up the thoughts of Jem's coming that night, when she heard his step
at the door.

He told her of his progress with his mother; he told her his hopes,
and was silent on the subject of his fears.

"To think how sorrow and joy are mixed up together. You'll date your
start in life as Mary's acknowledged lover from poor Alice Wilson's
burial day. Well! the dead are soon forgotten!"

"Dear Margaret!--But you're worn out with your long evening waiting
for me. I don't wonder. But never you, nor any one else, think
because God sees fit to call up new interests, perhaps right out
of the grave, that therefore the dead are forgotten. Margaret, you
yourself can remember our looks, and fancy what we're like."

"Yes! but what has that to do with remembering Alice?"

"Why, just this. You're not always trying to think on our faces, and
making a labour of remembering; but often, I'll be bound, when you're
sinking off to sleep, or when you're very quiet and still, the faces
you knew so well when you could see, come smiling before you with
loving looks. Or you remember them, without striving after it, and
without thinking it's your duty to keep recalling them. And so it is
with them that are hidden from our sight. If they've been worthy to
be heartily loved while alive, they'll not be forgotten when dead;
it's against nature. And we need no more be upbraiding ourselves
for letting in God's rays of light upon our sorrow, and no more
be fearful of forgetting them, because their memory is not always
haunting and taking up our minds, than you need to trouble yourself
about remembering your grandfather's face, or what the stars were
like,--you can't forget if you would, what it's such a pleasure to
think about. Don't fear my forgetting Aunt Alice."

"I'm not, Jem; not now, at least; only you seemed so full about
Mary."

"I've kept it down so long, remember. How glad Aunt Alice would have
been to know that I might hope to have her for my wife! that's to
say, if God spares her!"

"She would not have known it, even if you could have told her this
last fortnight,--ever since you went away she's been thinking always
that she was a little child at her mother's apron-string. She must
have been a happy little thing; it was such a pleasure to her to
think about those early days, when she lay old and gray on her
death-bed."

"I never knew any one seem more happy all her life long."

"Ay! and how gentle and easy her death was! She thought her mother
was near her."

They fell into calm thought about those last peaceful happy hours.

It struck eleven. Jem started up.

"I should have been gone long ago. Give me the bundle. You'll not
forget my mother. Good night, Margaret."

She let him out and bolted the door behind him. He stood on the steps
to adjust some fastening about the bundle. The court, the street, was
deeply still. Long ago had all retired to rest on that quiet Sabbath
evening. The stars shone down on the silent deserted streets, and
the soft clear moonlight fell in bright masses, leaving the steps on
which Jem stood in shadow.

A foot-fall was heard along the pavement; slow and heavy was the
sound. Before Jem had ended his little piece of business, a form
had glided into sight; a wan, feeble figure, bearing, with evident
and painful labour, a jug of water from the neighbouring pump. It
went before Jem, turned up the court at the corner of which he was
standing, passed into the broad, calm light; and there, with bowed
head, sinking and shrunk body, Jem recognised John Barton.

No haunting ghost could have had less of the energy of life in its
involuntary motions than he, who, nevertheless, went on with the
same measured clock-work tread until the door of his own house was
reached. And then he disappeared, and the latch fell feebly to, and
made a faint and wavering sound, breaking the solemn silence of the
night. Then all again was still.

For a minute or two Jem stood motionless, stunned by the thoughts
which the sight of Mary's father had called up.

Margaret did not know he was at home: had he stolen like a thief by
dead of night into his own dwelling? Depressed as Jem had often and
long seen him, this night there was something different about him
still; beaten down by some inward storm, he seemed to grovel along,
all self-respect lost and gone.

Must he be told of Mary's state? Jem felt he must not; and this for
many reasons. He could not be informed of her illness without many
other particulars being communicated at the same time, of which it
were better he should be kept in ignorance; indeed, of which Mary
herself could alone give the full explanation. No suspicion that he
was the criminal seemed hitherto to have been excited in the mind of
any one. Added to these reasons was Jem's extreme unwillingness to
face him, with the belief in his breast that he, and none other, had
done the fearful deed.

It was true that he was Mary's father, and as such had every right
to be told of all concerning her; but supposing he were, and that
he followed the impulse so natural to a father, and wished to go to
her, what might be the consequences? Among the mingled feelings she
had revealed in her delirium, ay, mingled even with the most tender
expressions of love for her father, was a sort of horror of him; a
dread of him as a blood-shedder, which seemed to separate him into
two persons,--one, the father who had dandled her on his knee, and
loved her all her life long; the other, the assassin, the cause of
all her trouble and woe.

If he presented himself before her while this idea of his character
was uppermost, who might tell the consequence?

Jem could not, and would not, expose her to any such fearful chance:
and to tell the truth, I believe he looked upon her as more his
own, to guard from all shadow of injury with most loving care, than
as belonging to any one else in this world, though girt with the
reverend name of Father, and guiltless of aught that might have
lessened such reverence.

If you think this account of mine confused, of the half-feelings,
half-reasons, which passed through Jem's mind, as he stood gazing at
the empty space, where that crushed form had so lately been seen,--if
you are perplexed to disentangle the real motives, I do assure you
it was from just such an involved set of thoughts that Jem drew the
resolution to act as if he had not seen that phantom likeness of John
Barton; himself, yet not himself.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

THE RETURN HOME.


   "_Dixwell._ Forgiveness! Oh, forgiveness, and a grave!
   _Mary._     God knows thy heart, my father! and I shudder
               To think what thou perchance hast acted.
   _Dixwell._  Oh!
   _Mary._     No common load of woe is thine, my father."

   ELLIOTT'S "KERHONAH."


Mary still hovered between life and death when Jem arrived at the
house where she lay; and the doctors were as yet unwilling to
compromise their wisdom by allowing too much hope to be entertained.
But the state of things, if not less anxious, was less distressing
than when Jem had quitted her. She lay now in a stupor, which was
partly disease, and partly exhaustion after the previous excitement.

And now Jem found the difficulty which every one who has watched by
a sick bed knows full well; and which is perhaps more insurmountable
to men than it is to women,--the difficulty of being patient, and
trying not to expect any visible change for long, long hours of sad
monotony.

But after awhile the reward came. The laboured breathing became
lower and softer, the heavy look of oppressive pain melted away
from the face, and a languor that was almost peace took the place
of suffering. She slept a natural sleep; and they stole about on
tip-toe, and spoke low, and softly, and hardly dared to breathe,
however much they longed to sigh out their thankful relief.

She opened her eyes. Her mind was in the tender state of a
lately-born infant's. She was pleased with the gay but not dazzling
colours of the paper; soothed by the subdued light; and quite
sufficiently amused by looking at all the objects in the room,--the
drawing of the ships, the festoons of the curtain, the bright flowers
on the painted backs of the chairs,--to care for any stronger
excitement. She wondered at the ball of glass, containing various
coloured sands from the Isle of Wight, or some such place, which hung
suspended from the middle of the little valance over the window. But
she did not care to exert herself to ask any questions, although she
saw Mrs. Sturgis standing at the bed-side with some tea, ready to
drop it into her mouth by spoonfuls.

She did not see the face of honest joy, of earnest thankfulness,--the
clasped hands,--the beaming eyes,--the trembling eagerness of
gesture, of one who had long awaited her awakening, and who now stood
behind the curtains watching through some little chink her every
faint motion; or if she had caught a glimpse of that loving, peeping
face, she was in too exhausted a state to have taken much notice,
or have long retained the impression that he she loved so well was
hanging about her, and blessing God for every conscious look which
stole over her countenance.

She fell softly into slumber, without a word having been spoken by
any one during that half hour of inexpressible joy. And again the
stillness was enforced by sign and whispered word, but with eyes that
beamed out their bright thoughts of hope. Jem sat by the side of the
bed, holding back the little curtain, and gazing as if he could never
gaze his fill at the pale, wasted face, so marbled and so chiselled
in its wan outline.

She wakened once more; her soft eyes opened, and met his over-bending
look. She smiled gently, as a baby does when it sees its mother
tending its little cot; and continued her innocent, infantine gaze
into his face, as if the sight gave her much unconscious pleasure.
But by-and-by a different expression came into her sweet eyes; a look
of memory and intelligence; her white face flushed the brightest rosy
red, and with feeble motion she tried to hide her head in the pillow.

It required all Jem's self-control to do what he knew and felt to
be necessary, to call Mrs. Sturgis, who was quietly dozing by the
fireside; and that done, he felt almost obliged to leave the room to
keep down the happy agitation which would gush out in every feature,
every gesture, and every tone.

From that time forward Mary's progress towards health was rapid.

There was every reason, but one, in favour of her speedy removal
home. All Jem's duties lay in Manchester. It was his mother's
dwelling-place, and there his plans for life had been to be worked
out; plans, which the suspicion and imprisonment he had fallen into,
had thrown for a time into a chaos, which his presence was required
to arrange into form. For he might find, in spite of a jury's
verdict, that too strong a taint was on his character for him ever to
labour in Manchester again. He remembered the manner in which some
one suspected of having been a convict was shunned by masters and
men, when he had accidentally met with work in their foundry; the
recollection smote him now, how he himself had thought that it did
not become an honest upright man to associate with one who had been
a prisoner. He could not choose but think on that poor humble being,
with his downcast conscious look; hunted out of the work-shop,
where he had sought to earn an honest livelihood, by the looks, and
half-spoken words, and the black silence of repugnance (worse than
words to bear), that met him on all sides.

Jem felt that his own character had been attainted; and that to many
it might still appear suspicious. He knew that he could convince the
world, by a future as blameless as his past had been, that he was
innocent. But at the same time he saw that he must have patience, and
nerve himself for some trials; and the sooner these were undergone,
the sooner he was aware of the place he held in men's estimation, the
better. He longed to have presented himself once more at the foundry;
and then the reality would drive away the pictures that would
(unbidden) come of a shunned man, eyed askance by all, and driven
forth to shape out some new career.

I said every reason "but one" inclined Jem to hasten Mary's return as
soon as she was sufficiently convalescent. That one was the meeting
which awaited her at home.

Turn it over as Jem would, he could not decide what was the best
course to pursue. He could compel himself to any line of conduct
that his reason and his sense of right told him to be desirable;
but they did not tell him it was desirable to speak to Mary, in her
tender state of mind and body, of her father. How much would be
implied by the mere mention of his name! Speak it as calmly, and
as indifferently as he might, he could not avoid expressing some
consciousness of the terrible knowledge she possessed.

She, for her part, was softer and gentler than she had ever been in
her gentlest mood; since her illness, her motions, her glances, her
voice were all tender in their languor. It seemed almost a trouble to
her to break the silence with the low sounds of her own sweet voice,
and her words fell sparingly on Jem's greedy, listening ear.

Her face was, however, so full of love and confidence, that Jem felt
no uneasiness at the state of silent abstraction into which she often
fell. If she did but love him, all would yet go right; and it was
better not to press for confidence on that one subject which must be
painful to both.

There came a fine, bright, balmy day. And Mary tottered once more out
into the open air, leaning on Jem's arm, and close to his beating
heart. And Mrs. Sturgis watched them from her door, with a blessing
on her lips, as they went slowly up the street.

They came in sight of the river. Mary shuddered.

"Oh, Jem! take me home. Yon river seems all made of glittering,
heaving, dazzling metal, just as it did when I began to be ill."

Jem led her homewards. She dropped her head as searching for
something on the ground.

"Jem!" He was all attention. She paused for an instant. "When may I
go home? To Manchester, I mean. I am so weary of this place; and I
would fain be at home."

She spoke in a feeble voice; not at all impatiently, as the words
themselves would seem to intimate, but in a mournful way, as if
anticipating sorrow even in the very fulfilment of her wishes.

"Darling! we will go whenever you wish; whenever you feel strong
enough. I asked Job to tell Margaret to get all in readiness for you
to go there at first. She'll tend you and nurse you. You must not go
home. Job proffered for you to go there."

"Ah! but I must go home, Jem. I'll try and not fail now in what's
right. There are things we must not speak on" (lowering her voice),
"but you'll be really kind if you'll not speak against my going home.
Let us say no more about it, dear Jem. I must go home, and I must go
alone."

"Not alone, Mary!"

"Yes, alone! I cannot tell you why I ask it. And if you guess, I know
you well enough to be sure you'll understand why I ask you never to
speak on that again to me, till I begin. Promise, dear Jem, promise!"

He promised; to gratify that beseeching face he promised. And then he
repented, and felt as if he had done ill. Then again he felt as if
she were the best judge, and knowing all (perhaps more than even he
did) might be forming plans which his interference would mar.

One thing was certain! it was a miserable thing to have this awful
forbidden ground of discourse; to guess at each other's thoughts,
when eyes were averted, and cheeks blanched, and words stood still,
arrested in their flow by some casual allusion.

At last a day, fine enough for Mary to travel on, arrived. She had
wished to go, but now her courage failed her. How could she have said
she was weary of that quiet house, where even Ben Sturgis' grumblings
only made a kind of harmonious bass in the concord between him and
his wife, so thoroughly did they know each other with the knowledge
of many years! How could she have longed to quit that little peaceful
room where she had experienced such loving tendence! Even the very
check bed-curtains became dear to her under the idea of seeing them
no more. If it was so with inanimate objects, if they had such power
of exciting regret, what were her feelings with regard to the kind
old couple, who had taken the stranger in, and cared for her, and
nursed her, as though she had been a daughter? Each wilful sentence
spoken in the half unconscious irritation of feebleness came now with
avenging self-reproach to her memory, as she hung about Mrs. Sturgis,
with many tears, which served instead of words to express her
gratitude and love.

Ben bustled about with the square bottle of Goldenwasser in one of
his hands, and a small tumbler in the other; he went to Mary, Jem,
and his wife in succession, pouring out a glass for each and bidding
them drink it to keep their spirits up: but as each severally
refused, he drank it himself; and passed on to offer the same
hospitality to another with the like refusal, and the like result.

When he had swallowed the last of the three draughts, he condescended
to give his reasons for having done so.

"I cannot abide waste. What's poured out mun be drunk. That's my
maxim." So saying, he replaced the bottle in the cupboard.

It was he who in a firm commanding voice at last told Jem and Mary
to be off, or they would be too late. Mrs. Sturgis had kept up till
then; but as they left her house, she could no longer restrain her
tears, and cried aloud in spite of her husband's upbraiding.

"Perhaps they'll be too late for th' train!" exclaimed she, with a
degree of hope, as the clock struck two.

"What! and come back again! No! no! that would never do. We've done
our part, and cried our cry; it's no use going o'er the same ground
again. I should ha' to give 'em more out of yon bottle when next
parting time came, and them three glasses they had made a hole in
the stuff, I can tell you. Time Jack was back from Hamburg with some
more."

When they reached Manchester, Mary looked very white, and the
expression on her face was almost stern. She was in fact summoning up
her resolution to meet her father if he were at home. Jem had never
named his midnight glimpse of John Barton to human being; but Mary
had a sort of presentiment that wander where he would, he would seek
his home at last. But in what mood she dreaded to think. For the
knowledge of her father's capability of guilt seemed to have opened
a dark gulf in his character, into the depths of which she trembled
to look. At one moment she would fain have claimed protection
against the life she must lead, for some time at least, alone with
a murderer! She thought of his gloom, before his mind was haunted
by the memory of so terrible a crime; his moody, irritable ways. She
imagined the evenings as of old: she, toiling at some work, long
after houses were shut, and folks abed; he, more savage than he had
ever been before with the inward gnawing of his remorse. At such
times she could have cried aloud with terror, at the scenes her fancy
conjured up.

But her filial duty, nay, her love and gratitude for many deeds of
kindness done to her as a little child, conquered all fear. She would
endure all imaginable terrors, although of daily occurrence. And
she would patiently bear all wayward violence of temper; more than
patiently would she bear it--pitifully, as one who knew of some awful
curse awaiting the blood-shedder. She would watch over him tenderly,
as the Innocent should watch over the Guilty; awaiting the gracious
seasons, wherein to pour oil and balm into the bitter wounds.

With the untroubled peace which the resolve to endure to the end
gives, she approached the house that from habit she still called
home, but which possessed the holiness of home no longer.

"Jem!" said she, as they stood at the entrance to the court, close
by Job Legh's door, "you must go in there and wait half-an-hour. Not
less. If in that time I don't come back, you go your ways to your
mother. Give her my dear love. I will send by Margaret when I want to
see you." She sighed heavily.

"Mary! Mary! I cannot leave you. You speak as coldly as if we were to
be nought to each other. And my heart's bound up in you. I know why
you bid me keep away, but--"

She put her hand on his arm, as he spoke in a loud agitated tone; she
looked into his face with upbraiding love in her eyes, and then she
said, while her lips quivered, and he felt her whole frame trembling:

"Dear Jem! I often could have told you more of love, if I had not
once spoken out so free. Remember that time, Jem, if ever you think
me cold. Then, the love that's in my heart would out in words; but
now, though I'm silent on the pain I'm feeling in quitting you, the
love is in my heart all the same. But this is not the time to speak
on such things. If I do not do what I feel to be right now, I may
blame myself all my life long! Jem, you promised--"

And so saying she left him. She went quicker than she would otherwise
have passed over those few yards of ground, for fear he should still
try to accompany her. Her hand was on the latch, and in a breath the
door was opened.

There sat her father, still and motionless--not even turning his head
to see who had entered; but perhaps he recognised the foot-step,--the
trick of action.

He sat by the fire; the grate I should say, for fire there was none.
Some dull, gray ashes, negligently left, long days ago, coldly choked
up the bars. He had taken the accustomed seat from mere force of
habit, which ruled his automaton-body. For all energy, both physical
and mental, seemed to have retreated inwards to some of the great
citadels of life, there to do battle against the Destroyer,
Conscience.

His hands were crossed, his fingers interlaced; usually a position
implying some degree of resolution, or strength; but in him it was so
faintly maintained, that it appeared more the result of chance; an
attitude requiring some application of outward force to alter,--and a
blow with a straw seemed as though it would be sufficient.

And as for his face, it was sunk and worn,--like a skull, with yet
a suffering expression that skulls have not! Your heart would have
ached to have seen the man, however hardly you might have judged his
crime.

But crime and all was forgotten by his daughter, as she saw his
abashed look, his smitten helplessness. All along she had felt it
difficult (as I may have said before) to reconcile the two ideas, of
her father and a blood-shedder. But now it was impossible. He was her
father! her own dear father! and in his sufferings, whatever their
cause, more dearly loved than ever before. His crime was a thing
apart, never more to be considered by her.

And tenderly did she treat him, and fondly did she serve him in every
way that heart could devise, or hand execute.

She had some money about her, the price of her strange services as a
witness; and when the lingering dusk drew on, she stole out to effect
some purchases necessary for her father's comfort.

For how body and soul had been kept together, even as much as they
were, during the days he had dwelt alone, no one can say. The house
was bare as when Mary had left it, of coal, or of candle, of food, or
of blessing in any shape.

She came quickly home; but as she passed Job Legh's door, she
stopped. Doubtless Jem had long since gone; and doubtless, too, he
had given Margaret some good reason for not intruding upon her friend
for this night at least, otherwise Mary would have seen her before
now.

But to-morrow,--would she not come in to-morrow? And who so quick as
blind Margaret in noticing tones, and sighs, and even silence?

She did not give herself time for further thought, her desire to be
once more with her father was too pressing; but she opened the door,
before she well knew what to say.

"It's Mary Barton! I know her by her breathing! Grandfather, it's
Mary Barton!"

Margaret's joy at meeting her, the open demonstration of her love,
affected Mary much; she could not keep from crying, and sat down weak
and agitated on the first chair she could find.

"Ay, ay, Mary! thou'rt looking a bit different to when I saw thee
last. Thou'lt give Jem and me good characters for sick nurses, I
trust. If all trades fail, I'll turn to that. Jem's place is for
life, I reckon. Nay, never redden so, lass. You and he know each
other's minds by this time!"

Margaret held her hand, and gently smiled into her face.

Job Legh took the candle up, and began a leisurely inspection.

"Thou hast getten a bit of pink in thy cheeks,--not much; but when
last I saw thee, thy lips were as white as a sheet. Thy nose is
sharpish at th' end; thou'rt more like thy father than ever thou wert
before. Lord! child, what's the matter? Art thou going to faint?"

For Mary had sickened at the mention of that name; yet she felt that
now or never was the time to speak.

"Father's come home!" she said, "but he's very poorly; I never saw
him as he is now, before. I asked Jem not to come near him for fear
it might fidget him."

She spoke hastily, and (to her own idea) in an unnatural manner. But
they did not seem to notice it, nor to take the hint she had thrown
out of company being unacceptable; for Job Legh directly put down
some insect, which he was impaling on a corking-pin, and exclaimed,

"Thy father come home! Why, Jem never said a word of it! And ailing
too! I'll go in, and cheer him with a bit of talk. I ne'er knew any
good come of delegating it."

"Oh, Job! father cannot stand--father is too ill. Don't come; not
but that you're very kind and good; but to-night--indeed," said she
at last, in despair, seeing Job still persevere in putting away his
things; "you must not come till I send or come for you. Father's in
that strange way, I can't answer for it if he sees strangers. Please
don't come. I'll come and tell you every day how he goes on. I must
be off now to see after him. Dear Job! kind Job! don't be angry with
me. If you knew all you'd pity me."

For Job was muttering away in high dudgeon, and even Margaret's
tone was altered as she wished Mary good night. Just then she could
ill brook coldness from any one, and least of all bear the idea of
being considered ungrateful by so kind and zealous a friend as Job
had been; so she turned round suddenly, even when her hand was on
the latch of the door, and ran back, and threw her arms about his
neck, and kissed him first, and then Margaret. And then, the tears
fast-falling down her cheeks, but no word spoken, she hastily left
the house, and went back to her home.

There was no change in her father's position, or in his spectral
look. He had answered her questions (but few in number, for so many
subjects were unapproachable) by monosyllables, and in a weak, high,
childish voice; but he had not lifted his eyes; he could not meet
his daughter's look. And she, when she spoke, or as she moved about,
avoided letting her eyes rest upon him. She wished to be her usual
self; but while every thing was done with a consciousness of purpose,
she felt it was impossible.

In this manner things went on for some days. At night he feebly
clambered up stairs to bed; and during those long dark hours Mary
heard those groans of agony which never escaped his lips by day, when
they were compressed in silence over his inward woe.

Many a time she sat up listening, and wondering if it would ease his
miserable heart if she went to him, and told him she knew all, and
loved and pitied him more than words could tell.

By day the monotonous hours wore on in the same heavy, hushed manner
as on that first dreary afternoon. He ate,--but without relish; and
food seemed no longer to nourish him, for each morning his face had
caught more of the ghastly fore-shadowing of Death.

The neighbours kept strangely aloof. Of late years John Barton had
had a repellent power about him, felt by all, except to the few who
had either known him in his better and happier days, or those to whom
he had given his sympathy and his confidence. People did not care to
enter the doors of one whose very depth of thoughtfulness rendered
him moody and stern. And now they contented themselves with a kind
inquiry when they saw Mary in her goings-out or in her comings-in.
With her oppressing knowledge, she imagined their reserved conduct
stranger than it was in reality. She missed Job and Margaret
too; who, in all former times of sorrow or anxiety since their
acquaintance first began, had been ready with their sympathy.

But most of all she missed the delicious luxury she had lately
enjoyed in having Jem's tender love at hand every hour of the day, to
ward off every wind of heaven, and every disturbing thought.

She knew he was often hovering about the house; though the knowledge
seemed to come more by intuition, than by any positive sight or sound
for the first day or two. On the third day she met him at Job Legh's.

They received her with every effort of cordiality; but still there
was a cobweb-veil of separation between them, to which Mary was
morbidly acute; while in Jem's voice, and eyes, and manner, there was
every evidence of most passionate, most admiring, and most trusting
love. The trust was shown by his respectful silence on that one point
of reserve on which she had interdicted conversation.

He left Job Legh's house when she did. They lingered on the step,
he holding her hand between both of his, as loth to let her go; he
questioned her as to when he should see her again.

"Mother does so want to see you," whispered he. "Can you come to see
her to-morrow? or when?"

"I cannot tell," replied she, softly. "Not yet. Wait awhile; perhaps
only a little while. Dear Jem, I must go to him,--dearest Jem."

The next day, the fourth from Mary's return home, as she was sitting
near the window, sadly dreaming over some work, she caught a glimpse
of the last person she wished to see--of Sally Leadbitter!

She was evidently coming to their house; another moment, and she
tapped at the door. John Barton gave an anxious, uneasy side-glance.
Mary knew that if she delayed answering the knock, Sally would not
scruple to enter; so as hastily as if the visit had been desired, she
opened the door, and stood there with the latch in her hand, barring
up all entrance, and as much as possible obstructing all curious
glances into the interior.

"Well, Mary Barton! You're home at last! I heard you'd getten home;
so I thought I'd just step over and hear the news."

She was bent on coming in, and saw Mary's preventive design. So she
stood on tip-toe, looking over Mary's shoulders into the room where
she suspected a lover to be lurking; but instead, she saw only the
figure of the stern, gloomy father she had always been in the habit
of avoiding; and she dropped down again, content to carry on the
conversation where Mary chose, and as Mary chose, in whispers.

"So the old governor is back again, eh? And what does he say to all
your fine doings at Liverpool, and before?--you and I know where. You
can't hide it now, Mary, for it's all in print."

Mary gave a low moan,--and then implored Sally to change the subject;
for unpleasant as it always was, it was doubly unpleasant in the
manner in which she was treating it. If they had been alone, Mary
would have borne it patiently,--or so she thought,--but now she
felt almost certain her father was listening; there was a subdued
breathing, a slight bracing-up of the listless attitude. But there
was no arresting Sally's curiosity to hear all she could respecting
the adventures Mary had experienced. She, in common with the rest of
Miss Simmonds' young ladies, was almost jealous of the fame that Mary
had obtained; to herself, such miserable notoriety.

"Nay! there's no use shunning talking it over. Why! it was in the
_Guardian_,--and the _Courier_,--and some one told Jane Hodson it was
even copied into a London paper. You've set up heroine on your own
account, Mary Barton. How did you like standing witness? Ar'n't them
lawyers impudent things? staring at one so. I'll be bound you wished
you'd taken my offer, and borrowed my black watered scarf! Now didn't
you, Mary? Speak truth!"

"To tell truth, I never thought about it then, Sally. How could I?"
asked she, reproachfully.

"Oh--I forgot. You were all for that stupid James Wilson. Well! if
I've ever the luck to go witness on a trial, see if I don't pick up a
better beau than the prisoner. I'll aim at a lawyer's clerk, but I'll
not take less than a turnkey."

Cast down as Mary was, she could hardly keep from smiling at the
idea, so wildly incongruous with the scene she had really undergone,
of looking out for admirers during a trial for murder.

"I'd no thought to be looking out for beaux, I can assure you,
Sally.--But don't let us talk any more about it; I can't bear to
think on it. How is Miss Simmonds? and everybody?"

"Oh, very well; and by the way she gave me a bit of a message for
you. You may come back to work if you'll behave yourself, she says.
I told you she'd be glad to have you back, after all this piece of
business, by way of tempting people to come to her shop. They'd come
from Salford to have a peep at you, for six months at least."

"Don't talk so; I cannot come, I can never face Miss Simmonds again.
And even if I could--" she stopped, and blushed.

"Ay! I know what you're thinking on. But that will not be this some
time, as he's turned off from the foundry,--you'd better think twice
afore refusing Miss Simmonds' offer."

"Turned off from the foundry! Jem?" cried Mary.

"To be sure! didn't you know it? Decent men were not going to work
with a--no! I suppose I mustn't say it, seeing you went to such
trouble to get up an _alibi_; not that I should think much the worse
of a spirited young fellow for falling foul of a rival,--they always
do at the theatre."

But Mary's thoughts were with Jem. How good he had been never to name
his dismissal to her. How much he had had to endure for her sake!

"Tell me all about it," she gasped out.

"Why, you see, they've always swords quite handy at them plays,"
began Sally; but Mary, with an impatient shake of her head,
interrupted,

"About Jem,--about Jem, I want to know."

"Oh! I don't pretend to know more than is in every one's mouth:
he's turned away from the foundry, because folks don't think you've
cleared him outright of the murder; though perhaps the jury were loth
to hang him. Old Mr. Carson is savage against judge and jury, and
lawyers and all, as I heard."

"I must go to him, I must go to him," repeated Mary, in a hurried
manner.

"He'll tell you all I've said is true, and not a word of lie,"
replied Sally. "So I'll not give your answer to Miss Simmonds, but
leave you to think twice about it. Good afternoon!"

Mary shut the door, and turned into the house.

Her father sat in the same attitude; the old unchanging attitude.
Only his head was more bowed towards the ground.

She put on her bonnet to go to Ancoats; for see, and question, and
comfort, and worship Jem, she must.

As she hung about her father for an instant before leaving him, he
spoke--voluntarily spoke for the first time since her return; but
his head was drooping so low she could not hear what he said, so she
stooped down; and after a moment's pause, he repeated the words,

"Tell Jem Wilson to come here at eight o'clock to-night."

Could he have overheard her conversation with Sally Leadbitter? They
had whispered low, she thought. Pondering on this, and many other
things, she reached Ancoats.




CHAPTER XXXV.

"FORGIVE US OUR TRESPASSES."


                  "Oh, had he lived,
   Replied Rusilla, never penitence
   Had equalled his! full well I know his heart,
   Vehement in all things. He would on himself
   Have wreaked such penance as had reached the height
   Of fleshly suffering,--yea, which being told,
   With its portentous rigour should have made
   The memory of his fault, o'erpowered and lost
   In shuddering pity and astonishment,
   Fade like a feeble horror."

   SOUTHEY'S "RODERICK."


As Mary was turning into the street where the Wilsons lived, Jem
overtook her. He came upon her suddenly, and she started.

"You're going to see mother?" he asked tenderly, placing her arm
within his, and slackening his pace.

"Yes, and you too. Oh, Jem, is it true? tell me."

She felt rightly that he would guess the meaning of her only half
expressed inquiry. He hesitated a moment before he answered her.

"Darling, it is; it's no use hiding it--if you mean that I'm no
longer to work at Duncombe's foundry. It's no time (to my mind) to
have secrets from each other, though I did not name it yesterday,
thinking you might fret. I shall soon get work again, never fear."

"But why did they turn you off, when the jury had said you were
innocent?"

"It was not just to say turned off, though I don't think I could have
well stayed on. A good number of the men managed to let out they
should not like to work under me again; there were some few who
knew me well enough to feel I could not have done it, but more were
doubtful; and one spoke to young Mr. Duncombe, hinting at what they
thought."

"Oh Jem! what a shame!" said Mary, with mournful indignation.

"Nay, darling! I'm not for blaming them. Poor fellows like them have
nought to stand upon and be proud of but their character, and it's
fitting they should take care of that, and keep that free from soil
and taint."

"But you,--what could they get but good from you? They might have
known you by this time."

"So some do; the overlooker, I'm sure, would know I'm innocent.
Indeed, he said as much to-day; and he said he had had some talk
with old Mr. Duncombe, and they thought it might be better if I left
Manchester for a bit; they'd recommend me to some other place."

But Mary could only shake her head in a mournful way, and repeat her
words,

"They might have known thee better, Jem."

Jem pressed the little hand he held between his own work-hardened
ones. After a minute or two, he asked,

"Mary, art thou much bound to Manchester? Would it grieve thee sore
to quit the old smoke-jack?"

"With thee?" she asked, in a quiet, glancing way.

"Ay, lass! Trust me, I'll ne'er ask thee to leave Manchester while
I'm in it. Because I've heard fine things of Canada; and our
overlooker has a cousin in the foundry line there.--Thou knowest
where Canada is, Mary?"

"Not rightly--not now, at any rate;--but with thee, Jem," her voice
sunk to a soft, low whisper, "anywhere--"

What was the use of a geographical description?

"But father!" said Mary, suddenly breaking that delicious silence
with the one sharp discord in her present life.

She looked up at her lover's grave face; and then the message her
father had sent flashed across her memory.

"Oh, Jem, did I tell you?--Father sent word he wished to speak with
you. I was to bid you come to him at eight to-night. What can he
want, Jem?"

"I cannot tell," replied he. "At any rate I'll go. It's no use
troubling ourselves to guess," he continued, after a pause of a few
minutes, during which they slowly and silently paced up and down the
by-street, into which he had led her when their conversation began.
"Come and see mother, and then I'll take thee home, Mary. Thou wert
all in a tremble when first I came up with thee; thou'rt not fit to
be trusted home by thyself," said he, with fond exaggeration of her
helplessness.

Yet a little more lovers' loitering; a few more words, in themselves
nothing--to you nothing, but to those two what tender passionate
language can I use to express the feelings which thrilled through
that young man and maiden, as they listened to the syllables made
dear and lovely through life by that hour's low-whispered talk.

It struck the half hour past seven.

"Come and speak to mother; she knows you're to be her daughter, Mary,
darling."

So they went in. Jane Wilson was rather chafed at her son's delay in
returning home, for as yet he had managed to keep her in ignorance of
his dismissal from the foundry; and it was her way to prepare some
little pleasure, some little comfort for those she loved; and if
they, unwittingly, did not appear at the proper time to enjoy her
preparation, she worked herself up into a state of fretfulness
which found vent in upbraidings as soon as ever the objects of her
care appeared, thereby marring the peace which should ever be the
atmosphere of a home, however humble; and causing a feeling almost
amounting to loathing to arise at the sight of the "stalled ox,"
which, though an effect and proof of careful love, has been the cause
of so much disturbance.

Mrs. Wilson had first sighed, and then grumbled to herself, over the
increasing toughness of the potato-cakes she had made for her son's
tea.

The door opened, and he came in; his face brightening into proud
smiles, Mary Barton hanging on his arm, blushing and dimpling, with
eye-lids veiling the happy light of her eyes,--there was around the
young couple a radiant atmosphere--a glory of happiness.

Could his mother mar it? Could she break into it with her Martha-like
cares? Only for one moment did she remember her sense of injury,--her
wasted trouble,--and then, her whole woman's heart heaving with
motherly love and sympathy, she opened her arms, and received Mary
into them, as, shedding tears of agitated joy, she murmured in her
ear,

"Bless thee, Mary, bless thee! Only make him happy, and God bless
thee for ever!"

It took some of Jem's self-command to separate those whom he so much
loved, and who were beginning, for his sake, to love one another so
dearly. But the time for his meeting John Barton drew on: and it was
a long way to his house.

As they walked briskly thither they hardly spoke; though many
thoughts were in their minds.

The sun had not long set, but the first faint shade of twilight was
over all; and when they opened the door, Jem could hardly perceive
the objects within by the waning light of day, and the flickering
fire-blaze.

But Mary saw all at a glance!

Her eye, accustomed to what was usual in the aspect of the room, saw
instantly what was unusual,--saw, and understood it all.

Her father was standing behind his habitual chair, holding by the
back of it as if for support. And opposite to him there stood Mr.
Carson; the dark out-line of his stern figure looming large against
the light of the fire in that little room.

Behind her father sat Job Legh, his head in his hands, and resting
his elbows on the little family table,--listening evidently; but as
evidently deeply affected by what he heard.

There seemed to be some pause in the conversation. Mary and Jem stood
at the half-open door, not daring to stir; hardly to breathe.

"And have I heard you aright?" began Mr. Carson, with his deep
quivering voice. "Man! have I heard you aright? Was it you, then,
that killed my boy? my only son?"--(he said these last few words
almost as if appealing for pity, and then he changed his tone to
one more vehement and fierce). "Don't dare to think that I shall be
merciful, and spare you, because you have come forward to accuse
yourself. I tell you I will not spare you the least pang the law can
inflict,--you, who did not show pity on my boy, shall have none from
me."

"I did not ask for any," said John Barton, in a low voice.

"Ask, or not ask, what care I? You shall be hanged--hanged--man!"
said he, advancing his face, and repeating the word with slow,
grinding emphasis, as if to infuse some of the bitterness of his soul
into it.

John Barton gasped, but not with fear. It was only that he felt it
terrible to have inspired such hatred, as was concentrated into every
word, every gesture of Mr. Carson's.

"As for being hanged, sir, I know it's all right and proper. I dare
say it's bad enough; but I tell you what, sir," speaking with an
out-burst, "if you'd hanged me the day after I'd done the deed, I
would have gone down on my knees and blessed you. Death! Lord, what
is it to Life? To such a life as I've been leading this fortnight
past. Life at best is no great thing; but such a life as I have
dragged through since that night," he shuddered at the thought. "Why,
sir, I've been on the point of killing myself this many a time to
get away from my own thoughts. I didn't! and I'll tell you why.
I didn't know but that I should be more haunted than ever with
the recollection of my sin. Oh! God above only can tell the agony
with which I've repented me of it, and part perhaps because I
feared He would think I were impatient of the misery He sent as
punishment--far, far worse misery than any hanging, sir." He ceased
from excess of emotion.

Then he began again.

"Sin' that day (it may be very wicked, sir, but it's the truth) I've
kept thinking and thinking if I were but in that world where they say
God is, He would, may be, teach me right from wrong, even if it were
with many stripes. I've been sore puzzled here. I would go through
Hell-fire if I could but get free from sin at last, it's such an
awful thing. As for hanging, that's just nought at all."

His exhaustion compelled him to sit down. Mary rushed to him. It
seemed as if till then he had been unaware of her presence.

"Ay, ay, wench!" said he feebly, "is it thee? Where's Jem Wilson?"

Jem came forward. John Barton spoke again, with many a break and
gasping pause,

"Lad! thou hast borne a deal for me. It's the meanest thing I ever
did to leave thee to bear the brunt. Thou, who wert as innocent of
any knowledge of it as the babe unborn. I'll not bless thee for it.
Blessing from such as me would not bring thee any good. Thou'lt love
Mary, though she is my child."

He ceased, and there was a pause of a few seconds.

Then Mr. Carson turned to go. When his hand was on the latch of the
door, he hesitated for an instant.

"You can have no doubt for what purpose I go. Straight to the
police-office, to send men to take care of you, wretched man, and
your accomplice. To-morrow morning your tale shall be repeated to
those who can commit you to gaol, and before long you shall have the
opportunity of trying how desirable hanging is."

"Oh, sir!" said Mary, springing forward, and catching hold of Mr.
Carson's arm, "my father is dying. Look at him, sir. If you want
Death for Death, you have it. Don't take him away from me these last
hours. He must go alone through Death, but let me be with him as long
as I can. Oh, sir! if you have any mercy in you, leave him here to
die."

John himself stood up, stiff and rigid, and replied,

"Mary, wench! I owe him summut. I will go die, where, and as he
wishes me. Thou hast said true, I am standing side by side with
Death; and it matters little where I spend the bit of time left of
Life. That time I must pass in wrestling with my soul for a character
to take into the other world. I'll go where you see fit, sir. He's
innocent," faintly indicating Jem, as he fell back in his chair.

"Never fear! They cannot touch him," said Job Legh, in a low voice.

But as Mr. Carson was on the point of leaving the house with no sign
of relenting about him, he was again stopped by John Barton, who had
risen once more from his chair, and stood supporting himself on Jem,
while he spoke.

"Sir, one word! My hairs are gray with suffering, and yours with
years--"

"And have I had no suffering?" asked Mr. Carson, as if appealing for
sympathy, even to the murderer of his child.

And the murderer of his child answered to the appeal, and groaned in
spirit over the anguish he had caused.

"Have I had no inward suffering to blanch these hairs? Have not I
toiled and struggled even to these years with hopes in my heart that
all centered in my boy? I did not speak of them, but were they not
there? I seemed hard and cold; and so I might be to others, but not
to him!--who shall ever imagine the love I bore to him? Even he never
dreamed how my heart leapt up at the sound of his footstep, and how
precious he was to his poor old father.--And he is gone--killed--out
of the hearing of all loving words--out of my sight for ever. He was
my sunshine, and now it is night! Oh, my God! comfort me, comfort
me!" cried the old man aloud.

The eyes of John Barton grew dim with tears. Rich and poor, masters
and men, were then brothers in the deep suffering of the heart; for
was not this the very anguish he had felt for little Tom, in years so
long gone by that they seemed like another life!

The mourner before him was no longer the employer; a being of another
race, eternally placed in antagonistic attitude; going through the
world glittering like gold, with a stony heart within, which knew no
sorrow but through the accidents of Trade; no longer the enemy, the
oppressor, but a very poor and desolate old man.

The sympathy for suffering, formerly so prevalent a feeling with him,
again filled John Barton's heart, and almost impelled him to speak
(as best he could) some earnest, tender words to the stern man,
shaking in his agony.

But who was he, that he should utter sympathy or consolation? The
cause of all this woe.

Oh blasting thought! Oh miserable remembrance! He had forfeited all
right to bind up his brother's wounds.

Stunned by the thought, he sank upon the seat, almost crushed with
the knowledge of the consequences of his own action; for he had
no more imagined to himself the blighted home, and the miserable
parents, than does the soldier, who discharges his musket, picture
to himself the desolation of the wife, and the pitiful cries of the
helpless little ones, who are in an instant to be made widowed and
fatherless.

To intimidate a class of men, known only to those below them as
desirous to obtain the greatest quantity of work for the lowest
wages,--at most to remove an overbearing partner from an obnoxious
firm, who stood in the way of those who struggled as well as they
were able to obtain their rights,--this was the light in which
John Barton had viewed his deed; and even so viewing it, after the
excitement had passed away, the Avenger, the sure Avenger, had found
him out.

But now he knew that he had killed a man, and a brother,--now he knew
that no good thing could come out of this evil, even to the sufferers
whose cause he had so blindly espoused.

He lay across the table, broken-hearted. Every fresh quivering sob of
Mr. Carson's stabbed him to his soul.

He felt execrated by all; and as if he could never lay bare the
perverted reasonings which had made the performance of undoubted sin
appear a duty. The longing to plead some faint excuse grew stronger
and stronger. He feebly raised his head, and looking at Job Legh, he
whispered out,

"I did not know what I was doing, Job Legh; God knows I didn't! Oh,
sir!" said he wildly, almost throwing himself at Mr. Carson's feet,
"say you forgive me the anguish I now see I have caused you. I care
not for pain, or death, you know I don't; but oh, man! forgive me the
trespass I have done!"

"Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against
us," said Job, solemnly and low, as if in prayer; as if the words
were suggested by those John Barton had used.

Mr. Carson took his hands away from his face. I would rather see
death than the ghastly gloom which darkened that countenance.

"Let my trespasses be unforgiven, so that I may have vengeance for my
son's murder."

There are blasphemous actions as well as blasphemous words: all
unloving, cruel deeds are acted blasphemy.

Mr. Carson left the house. And John Barton lay on the ground as one
dead.

They lifted him up, and almost hoping that that deep trance might be
to him the end of all earthly things, they bore him to his bed.

For a time they listened with divided attention to his faint
breathings; for in each hasty hurried step that echoed in the street
outside, they thought they heard the approach of the officers of
justice.

When Mr. Carson left the house he was dizzy with agitation; the hot
blood went careering through his frame. He could not see the deep
blue of the night-heavens for the fierce pulses which throbbed in
his head. And partly to steady and calm himself, he leaned against a
railing, and looked up into those calm majestic depths with all their
thousand stars.

And by-and-by his own voice returned upon him, as if the last words
he had spoken were being uttered through all that infinite space; but
in their echoes there was a tone of unutterable sorrow.

"Let my trespasses be unforgiven, so that I may have vengeance for my
son's murder."

He tried to shake off the spiritual impression made by this
imagination. He was feverish and ill,--and no wonder.

So he turned to go homewards; not, as he had threatened, to the
police-office. After all (he told himself), that would do in the
morning. No fear of the man's escaping, unless he escaped to the
grave.

So he tried to banish the phantom voices and shapes which came
unbidden to his brain, and to recall his balance of mind by walking
calmly and slowly, and noticing every thing which struck his senses.

It was a warm soft evening in spring, and there were many persons in
the streets. Among others, a nurse with a little girl in her charge,
conveying her home from some children's gaiety; a dance most likely,
for the lovely little creature was daintily decked out in soft, snowy
muslin; and her fairy feet tripped along by her nurse's side as if to
the measure of some tune she had lately kept time to.

Suddenly up behind her there came a rough, rude errand-boy, nine
or ten years of age; a giant he looked by the fairy-child, as she
fluttered along. I don't know how it was, but in some awkward way
he knocked the poor little girl down upon the hard pavement as he
brushed rudely past, not much caring whom he hurt, so that he got
along.

The child arose sobbing with pain; and not without cause, for blood
was dropping down from the face, but a minute before so fair and
bright--dropping down on the pretty frock, making those scarlet marks
so terrible to little children.

The nurse, a powerful woman, had seized the boy, just as Mr. Carson
(who had seen the whole transaction) came up.

"You naughty little rascal! I'll give you to a policeman, that
I will! Do you see how you've hurt the little girl? Do you?"
accompanying every sentence with a violent jerk of passionate anger.

The lad looked hard and defying; but withal terrified at the threat
of the policeman, those ogres of our streets to all unlucky urchins.
The nurse saw it, and began to drag him along, with a view of making
what she called "a wholesome impression."

His terror increased, and with it his irritation; when the little
sweet face, choking away its sobs, pulled down nurse's head and said,

"Please, dear nurse, I'm not much hurt; it was very silly to cry, you
know. He did not mean to do it. _He did not know what he was doing_,
did you, little boy? Nurse won't call a policeman, so don't be
frightened." And she put up her little mouth to be kissed by her
injurer, just as she had been taught to do at home to "make peace."

"That lad will mind, and be more gentle for the time to come, I'll
be bound, thanks to that little lady," said a passer-by, half to
himself, and half to Mr. Carson, whom he had observed to notice the
scene.

The latter took no apparent heed of the remark, but passed on. But
the child's pleading reminded him of the low, broken voice he had so
lately heard, penitently and humbly urging the same extenuation of
his great guilt.

"I did not know what I was doing."

He had some association with those words; he had heard, or read of
that plea somewhere before. Where was it?

Could it be--?

He would look when he got home. So when he entered his house he went
straight and silently up-stairs to his library, and took down the
great large handsome Bible, all grand and golden, with its leaves
adhering together from the bookbinder's press, so little had it been
used.

On the first page (which fell open to Mr. Carson's view) were written
the names of his children, and his own.

   "Henry John, son of the above John and Elizabeth Carson.
   Born, Sept. 29th, 1815."

To make the entry complete, his death should now be added. But the
page became hidden by the gathering mist of tears.

Thought upon thought, and recollection upon recollection came
crowding in, from the remembrance of the proud day when he had
purchased the costly book, in order to write down the birth of the
little babe of a day old.

He laid his head down on the open page, and let the tears fall slowly
on the spotless leaves.

His son's murderer was discovered; had confessed his guilt; and yet
(strange to say) he could not hate him with the vehemence of hatred
he had felt, when he had imagined him a young man, full of lusty
life, defying all laws, human and divine. In spite of his desire to
retain the revengeful feeling he considered as a duty to his dead
son, something of pity would steal in for the poor, wasted skeleton
of a man, the smitten creature, who had told him of his sin, and
implored his pardon that night.

In the days of his childhood and youth, Mr. Carson had been
accustomed to poverty; but it was honest, decent poverty; not the
grinding squalid misery he had remarked in every part of John
Barton's house, and which contrasted strangely with the pompous
sumptuousness of the room in which he now sat. Unaccustomed wonder
filled his mind at the reflection of the different lots of the
brethren of mankind.

Then he roused himself from his reverie, and turned to the object of
his search--the Gospel, where he half expected to find the tender
pleading: "They know not what they do."

It was murk midnight by this time, and the house was still and quiet.
There was nothing to interrupt the old man in his unwonted study.

Years ago, the Gospel had been his task-book in learning to read. So
many years ago, that he had become familiar with the events before he
could comprehend the Spirit that made the Life.

He fell to the narrative now afresh, with all the interest of a
little child. He began at the beginning, and read on almost greedily,
understanding for the first time the full meaning of the story. He
came to the end; the awful End. And there were the haunting words of
pleading.

He shut the book, and thought deeply.

All night long, the Archangel combated with the Demon.

All night long, others watched by the bed of Death. John Barton had
revived to fitful intelligence. He spoke at times with even something
of his former energy; and in the racy Lancashire dialect he had
always used when speaking freely.

"You see I've so often been hankering after the right way; and it's
a hard one for a poor man to find. At least it's been so to me. No
one learned me, and no one telled me. When I was a little chap they
taught me to read, and then they ne'er gave me no books; only I
heard say the Bible was a good book. So when I grew thoughtful, and
puzzled, I took to it. But you'd never believe black was black, or
night was night, when you saw all about you acting as if black was
white, and night was day. It's not much I can say for myself in
t'other world, God forgive me; but I can say this, I would fain have
gone after the Bible rules if I'd seen folk credit it; they all spoke
up for it, and went and did clean contrary. In those days I would ha'
gone about wi' my Bible, like a little child, my finger in th' place,
and asking the meaning of this or that text, and no one told me. Then
I took out two or three texts as clear as glass, and I tried to do
what they bid me do. But I don't know how it was; masters and men,
all alike cared no more for minding those texts, than I did for th'
Lord Mayor of London; so I grew to think it must be a sham put upon
poor ignorant folk, women, and such-like.

"It was not long I tried to live Gospel-wise, but it was liker heaven
than any other bit of earth has been. I'd old Alice to strengthen me;
but every one else said, 'Stand up for thy rights, or thou'lt never
get 'em;' and wife and children never spoke, but their helplessness
cried aloud, and I was driven to do as others did,--and then Tom
died. You know all about that--I'm getting scant o' breath, and
blind-like."

Then again he spoke, after some minutes of hushed silence.

"All along it came natural to love folk, though now I am what I am.
I think one time I could e'en have loved the masters if they'd ha'
letten me; that was in my Gospel-days, afore my child died o' hunger.
I was tore in two often-times, between my sorrow for poor suffering
folk, and my trying to love them as caused their sufferings (to my
mind).

"At last I gave it up in despair, trying to make folks' actions
square wi' th' Bible; and I thought I'd no longer labour at following
th' Bible mysel. I've said all this afore, may be. But from that time
I've dropped down, down,--down."

After that he only spoke in broken sentences.

"I did not think he'd been such an old man,--Oh! that he had but
forgiven me,"--and then came earnest, passionate, broken words of
prayer.

Job Legh had gone home like one struck down with the unexpected
shock. Mary and Jem together waited the approach of death; but as
the final struggle drew on, and morning dawned, Jem suggested some
alleviation to the gasping breath, to purchase which he left the
house in search of a druggist's shop, which should be open at that
early hour.

During his absence, Barton grew worse; he had fallen across the bed,
and his breathing seemed almost stopped; in vain did Mary strive to
raise him, her sorrow and exhaustion had rendered her too weak.

So, on hearing some one enter the house-place below, she cried out
for Jem to come to her assistance.

A step, which was not Jem's, came up the stairs.

Mr. Carson stood in the door-way. In one instant he comprehended the
case.

He raised up the powerless frame; and the departing soul looked out
of the eyes with gratitude. He held the dying man propped in his
arms. John Barton folded his hands as if in prayer.

"Pray for us," said Mary, sinking on her knees, and forgetting in
that solemn hour all that had divided her father and Mr. Carson.

No other words could suggest themselves than some of those he had
read only a few hours before.

"God be merciful to us sinners.--Forgive us our trespasses as we
forgive them that trespass against us."

And when the words were said, John Barton lay a corpse in Mr.
Carson's arms.

So ended the tragedy of a poor man's life.


Mary knew nothing more for many minutes. When she recovered
consciousness, she found herself supported by Jem on the "settle" in
the house-place. Job and Mr. Carson were there, talking together
lowly and solemnly. Then Mr. Carson bade farewell and left the house;
and Job said aloud, but as if speaking to himself,

"God has heard that man's prayer. He has comforted him."




CHAPTER XXXVI.

JEM'S INTERVIEW WITH MR. DUNCOMBE.


   "The first dark day of nothingness,
   The last of danger and distress."

   BYRON.


Although Mary had hardly been conscious of her thoughts, and it had
been more like a secret instinct informing her soul, than the result
of any process of reasoning, she had felt for some time (ever since
her return from Liverpool, in fact), that for her father there was
but one thing to be desired and anticipated, and that was death!

She had seen that Conscience had given the mortal wound to his
earthly frame; she did not dare to question of the infinite mercy of
God, what the Future Life would be to him.

Though at first desolate and stunned by the blow which had fallen on
herself, she was resigned and submissive as soon as she recovered
strength enough to ponder and consider a little; and you may be
sure that no tenderness or love was wanting on Jem's part, and no
consideration and sympathy on that of Job and Margaret, to soothe
and comfort the girl who now stood alone in the world as far as
blood-relations were concerned.

She did not ask or care to know what arrangements they were making
in whispered tones with regard to the funeral. She put herself into
their hands with the trust of a little child; glad to be undisturbed
in the reveries and remembrances which filled her eyes with tears,
and caused them to fall quietly down her pale cheeks.

It was the longest day she had ever known in her life; every charge
and every occupation was taken away from her: but perhaps the length
of quiet time thus afforded was really good, although its duration
weighed upon her; for by this means she contemplated her situation in
every light, and fully understood that the morning's event had left
her an orphan; and thus she was spared the pangs caused to us by the
occurrence of death in the evening, just before we should naturally,
in the usual course of events, lie down to slumber. For in such case,
worn out by anxiety, and it may be by much watching, our very excess
of grief rocks itself to sleep, before we have had time to realise
its cause; and we waken, with a start of agony like a fresh stab, to
the consciousness of the one awful vacancy, which shall never, while
the world endures, be filled again.

The day brought its burden of duty to Mrs. Wilson. She felt bound
by regard, as well as by etiquette, to go and see her future
daughter-in-law. And by an old association of ideas (perhaps of death
with church-yards, and churches with Sunday) she thought it necessary
to put on her best, and latterly unused clothes, the airing of which
on a little clothes-horse before the fire seemed to give her a not
unpleasing occupation.

When Jem returned home late in the evening succeeding John Barton's
death, weary and oppressed with the occurrences and excitements
of the day, he found his mother busy about her mourning, and much
inclined to talk. Although he longed for quiet, he could not avoid
sitting down and answering her questions.

"Well, Jem, he's gone at last, is he?"

"Yes. How did you hear, mother?"

"Oh, Job came over here and telled me, on his way to the
undertaker's. Did he make a fine end?"

It struck Jem that she had not heard of the confession which had
been made by John Barton on his death-bed; he remembered Job Legh's
discretion, and he determined that if it could be avoided his mother
should never hear of it. Many of the difficulties to be anticipated
in preserving the secret would be obviated, if he could induce his
mother to fall into the plan he had named to Mary of emigrating to
Canada. The reasons which rendered this secrecy desirable related
to the domestic happiness he hoped for. With his mother's irritable
temper he could hardly expect that all allusion to the crime of John
Barton would be for ever restrained from passing her lips, and he
knew the deep trial such references would be to Mary. Accordingly he
resolved as soon as possible in the morning to go to Job and beseech
his silence; he trusted that secrecy in that quarter, even if the
knowledge had been extended to Margaret, might be easily secured.

But what would be Mr. Carson's course? Were there any means by which
he might be persuaded to spare John Barton's memory?

He was roused up from this train of thought by his mother's more
irritated tone of voice.

"Jem!" she was saying, "thou might'st just as well never be at a
death-bed again, if thou cannot bring off more news about it; here
have I been by mysel all day (except when oud Job came in), but
thinks I, when Jem comes he'll be sure to be good company, seeing
he was in the house at the very time of the death; and here thou
art, without a word to throw at a dog, much less thy mother: it's no
use thy going to a death-bed if thou cannot carry away any of the
sayings!"

"He did not make any, mother," replied Jem.

"Well, to be sure! So fond as he used to be of holding forth, to miss
such a fine opportunity that will never come again! Did he die easy?"

"He was very restless all night long," said Jem, reluctantly
returning to the thoughts of that time.

"And in course thou plucked the pillow away? Thou didst not! Well!
with thy bringing up, and thy learning, thou might'st have known that
were the only help in such a case. There were pigeons' feathers in
the pillow, depend on't. To think of two grown-up folk like you and
Mary, not knowing death could never come easy to a person lying on a
pillow with pigeons' feathers in!"

Jem was glad to escape from all this talking to the solitude and
quiet of his own room, where he could lie and think uninterruptedly
of what had happened and remained to be done.

The first thing was to seek an interview with Mr. Duncombe, his
former master. Accordingly, early the next morning Jem set off on his
walk to the works, where for so many years his days had been spent;
where for so long a time his thoughts had been thought, his hopes and
fears experienced. It was not a cheering feeling to remember that
henceforward he was to be severed from all these familiar places; nor
were his spirits enlivened by the evident feelings of the majority of
those who had been his fellow-workmen. As he stood in the entrance to
the foundry, awaiting Mr. Duncombe's leisure, many of those employed
in the works passed him on their return from breakfast; and with one
or two exceptions, without any acknowledgment of former acquaintance
beyond a distant nod at the utmost.

"It is hard," said Jem to himself, with a bitter and indignant
feeling rising in his throat, "that let a man's life be what it may,
folk are so ready to credit the first word against him. I could live
it down if I stayed in England; but then what would not Mary have to
bear? Sooner or later the truth would out; and then she would be a
show to folk for many a day as John Barton's daughter. Well! God does
not judge as hardly as man, that's one comfort for all of us!"

Mr. Duncombe did not believe in Jem's guilt, in spite of the silence
in which he again this day heard the imputation of it; but he agreed
that under the circumstances it was better he should leave the
country.

"We have been written to by government, as I think I told you
before, to recommend an intelligent man, well acquainted with
mechanics, as instrument-maker to the Agricultural College they
are establishing at Toronto, in Canada. It is a comfortable
appointment,--house,--land,--and a good per-centage on the
instruments made. I will show you the particulars if I can lay my
hand on the letter, which I believe I must have left at home."

"Thank you, sir. No need for seeing the letter to say I'll accept it.
I must leave Manchester; and I'd as lief quit England at once when
I'm about it."

"Of course government will give you your passage; indeed, I believe
an allowance would be made for a family if you had one; but you are
not a married man, I believe?"

"No, sir, but--" Jem hung back from a confession with the awkwardness
of a girl.

"But--" said Mr. Duncombe, smiling, "you would like to be a married
man before you go, I suppose; eh, Wilson?"

"If you please, sir. And there's my mother, too. I hope she'll go
with us. But I can pay her passage; no need to trouble government."

"Nay, nay! I'll write to-day and recommend you; and say that you have
a family of two. They'll never ask if the family goes upwards or
downwards. I shall see you again before you sail, I hope, Wilson;
though I believe they'll not allow you long to wait. Come to my house
next time; you'll find it pleasanter, I daresay. These men are so
wrong-headed. Keep up your heart!"

Jem felt that it was a relief to have this point settled; and that he
need no longer weigh reasons for and against his emigration.

And with his path growing clearer and clearer before him the longer
he contemplated it, he went to see Mary, and if he judged it fit, to
tell her what he had decided upon. Margaret was sitting with her.

"Grandfather wants to see you!" said she to Jem on his entrance.

"And I want to see him," replied Jem, suddenly remembering his last
night's determination to enjoin secrecy on Job Legh.

So he hardly stayed to kiss poor Mary's sweet woe-begone face, but
tore himself away from his darling to go to the old man, who awaited
him impatiently.

"I've getten a note from Mr. Carson," exclaimed Job the moment he saw
Jem; "and man-alive, he wants to see thee and me! For sure, there's
no more mischief up, is there?" said he, looking at Jem with an
expression of wonder. But if any suspicion mingled for an instant
with the thoughts that crossed Job's mind, it was immediately
dispelled by Jem's honest, fearless, open countenance.

"I can't guess what he's wanting, poor old chap," answered he. "May
be there's some point he's not yet satisfied on; may be--but it's no
use guessing; let's be off."

"It wouldn't be better for thee to be scarce a bit, would it, and
leave me to go and find out what's up? He has, perhaps, getten some
crotchet into his head thou'rt an accomplice, and is laying a trap
for thee."

"I'm not afeared!" said Jem; "I've done nought wrong, and know nought
wrong, about yon poor dead lad; though I'll own I had evil thoughts
once on a time. Folk can't mistake long if once they'll search into
the truth. I'll go and give the old gentleman all the satisfaction in
my power, now it can injure no one. I'd my own reasons for wanting to
see him besides, and it all falls in right enough for me."

Job was a little reassured by Jem's boldness; but still, if the truth
must be told, he wished the young man would follow his advice, and
leave him to sound Mr. Carson's intentions.

Meanwhile Jane Wilson had donned her Sunday suit of black, and set
off on her errand of condolence. She felt nervous and uneasy at the
idea of the moral sayings and texts which she fancied were expected
from visitors on occasions like the present; and prepared many a good
set speech as she walked towards the house of mourning.

As she gently opened the door, Mary, sitting idly by the fire, caught
a glimpse of her,--of Jem's mother,--of the early friend of her dead
parents,--of the kind minister to many a little want in days of
childhood,--and rose and came and fell about her neck, with many a
sob and moan, saying,

"Oh, he's gone--he's dead--all gone--all dead, and I am left alone!"

"Poor wench! poor, poor wench!" said Jane Wilson, tenderly kissing
her. "Thou'rt not alone, so donnot take on so. I'll say nought of Him
who's above, for thou know'st He is ever the orphan's friend; but
think on Jem! nay, Mary, dear, think on me! I'm but a frabbit woman
at times, but I've a heart within me through all my temper, and thou
shalt be as a daughter henceforward,--as mine own ewe-lamb. Jem shall
not love thee better in his way, than I will in mine; and thou'lt
bear with my turns, Mary, knowing that in my soul God sees the love
that shall ever be thine, if thou'lt take me for thy mother, and
speak no more of being alone."

Mrs. Wilson was weeping herself long before she had ended this
speech, which was so different to all she had planned to say, and
from all the formal piety she had laid in store for the visit; for
this was heart's piety, and needed no garnish of texts to make it
true religion, pure and undefiled.

They sat together on the same chair, their arms encircling each
other; they wept for the same dead; they had the same hope, and
trust, and overflowing love in the living.

From that time forward, hardly a passing cloud dimmed the happy
confidence of their intercourse; even by Jem would his mother's
temper sooner be irritated than by Mary; before the latter she
repressed her occasional nervous ill-humour till the habit of
indulging it was perceptibly decreased.

Years afterwards in conversation with Jem, he was startled by a
chance expression which dropped from his mother's lips; it implied a
knowledge of John Barton's crime. It was many a long day since they
had seen any Manchester people who could have revealed the secret
(if indeed it was known in Manchester, against which Jem had guarded
in every possible way). And he was led to inquire first as to the
extent, and then as to the source of her knowledge. It was Mary
herself who had told all.

For on the morning to which this chapter principally relates, as Mary
sat weeping, and as Mrs. Wilson comforted her by every tenderest word
and caress, she revealed to the dismayed and astonished Jane, the
sting of her deep sorrow; the crime which stained her dead father's
memory.

She was quite unconscious that Jem had kept it secret from his
mother; she had imagined it bruited abroad as the suspicion against
her lover had been; so word after word (dropped from her lips in the
supposition that Mrs. Wilson knew all) had told the tale and revealed
the cause of her deep anguish; deeper than is ever caused by Death
alone.

On large occasions like the present, Mrs. Wilson's innate generosity
came out. Her weak and ailing frame imparted its irritation to her
conduct in small things, and daily trifles; but she had deep and
noble sympathy with great sorrows, and even at the time that Mary
spoke she allowed no expression of surprise or horror to escape her
lips. She gave way to no curiosity as to the untold details; she was
as secret and trustworthy as her son himself; and if in years to come
her anger was occasionally excited against Mary, and she, on rare
occasions, yielded to ill-temper against her daughter-in-law, she
would upbraid her for extravagance, or stinginess, or over-dressing,
or under-dressing, or too much mirth or too much gloom, but never,
never in her most uncontrolled moments did she allude to any one of
the circumstances relating to Mary's flirtation with Harry Carson,
or his murderer; and always when she spoke of John Barton, named
him with the respect due to his conduct before the last, miserable,
guilty month of his life.

Therefore it came like a blow to Jem when, after years had passed
away, he gathered his mother's knowledge of the whole affair. From
the day when he learnt (not without remorse) what hidden depths of
self-restraint she had in her soul, his manner to her, always tender
and respectful, became reverential; and it was more than ever a
loving strife between him and Mary which should most contribute
towards the happiness of the declining years of their mother.

But I am speaking of the events which have occurred only lately,
while I have yet many things to tell you that happened six or seven
years ago.




CHAPTER XXXVII.

DETAILS CONNECTED WITH THE MURDER.


   "The rich man dines, while the poor man pines,
     And eats his heart away;
   'They teach us lies,' he sternly cries,
     'Would _brothers_ do as they?'"

   "THE DREAM."


Mr. Carson stood at one of the breathing-moments of life. The object
of the toils, the fears, and the wishes of his past years, was
suddenly hidden from his sight,--vanished into the deep mystery
which circumscribes existence. Nay, even the vengeance which he had
proposed to himself as an aim for exertion, had been taken away from
before his eyes, as by the hand of God.

Events like these would have startled the most thoughtless into
reflection, much more such a man as Mr. Carson, whose mind, if
not enlarged, was energetic; indeed, whose very energy, having
been hitherto the cause of the employment of his powers in only
one direction, had prevented him from becoming largely and
philosophically comprehensive in his views.

But now the foundations of his past life were razed to the ground,
and the place they had once occupied was sown with salt, to be for
ever rebuilt no more. It was like the change from this Life to that
other hidden one, when so many of the motives which have actuated
all our earthly existence, will have become more fleeting than the
shadows of a dream. With a wrench of his soul from the past, so
much of which was as nothing, and worse than nothing to him now, Mr.
Carson took some hours, after he had witnessed the death of his son's
murderer, to consider his situation.

But suddenly, while he was deliberating, and searching for motives
which should be effective to compel him to exertion and action
once more; while he contemplated the desire after riches, social
distinction, a name among the merchant-princes amidst whom he moved,
and saw these false substances fade away into the shadows they truly
are, and one by one disappear into the grave of his son,--suddenly,
I say, the thought arose within him that more yet remained to be
learned about the circumstances and feelings which had prompted John
Barton's crime; and when once this mournful curiosity was excited,
it seemed to gather strength in every moment that its gratification
was delayed. Accordingly he sent a message to summon Job Legh and
Jem Wilson, from whom he promised himself some elucidation of what
was as yet unexplained; while he himself set forth to call on Mr.
Bridgenorth, whom he knew to have been Jem's attorney, with a
glimmering suspicion intruding on his mind, which he strove to repel,
that Jem might have had some share in his son's death.

He had returned before his summoned visitors arrived; and had time
enough to recur to the evening on which John Barton had made his
confession. He remembered with mortification how he had forgotten
his proud reserve, and his habitual concealment of his feelings, and
had laid bare his agony of grief in the presence of these two men
who were coming to see him by his desire; and he entrenched himself
behind stiff barriers of self-control, through which he hoped no
appearance of emotion would force its way in the conversation he
anticipated.

Nevertheless, when the servant announced that two men were there by
appointment to speak to him, and he had desired that they might be
shown into the library where he sat, any watcher might have perceived
by the trembling hands, and shaking head, not only how much he was
aged by the occurrences of the last few weeks, but also how much he
was agitated at the thought of the impending interview.

But he so far succeeded in commanding himself at first, as to appear
to Jem Wilson and Job Legh one of the hardest and most haughty men
they had ever spoken to, and to forfeit all the interest which he had
previously excited in their minds by his unreserved display of deep
and genuine feeling.

When he had desired them to be seated, he shaded his face with his
hand for an instant before speaking.

"I have been calling on Mr. Bridgenorth this morning," said he, at
last; "as I expected, he can give me but little satisfaction on some
points respecting the occurrence on the 18th of last month which I
desire to have cleared up. Perhaps you two can tell me what I want
to know. As intimate friends of Barton's you probably know, or can
conjecture a good deal. Have no scruple as to speaking the truth.
What you say in this room shall never be named again by me. Besides,
you are aware that the law allows no one to be tried twice for the
same offence."

He stopped for a minute, for the mere act of speaking was fatiguing
to him after the excitement of the last few weeks.

Job Legh took the opportunity of speaking.

"I'm not going to be affronted either for myself or Jem at what
you've just now been saying about the truth. You don't know us, and
there's an end on't; only it's as well for folk to think others good
and true until they're proved contrary. Ask what you like, sir, I'll
answer for it we'll either tell truth or hold our tongues."

"I beg your pardon," said Mr. Carson, slightly bowing his head. "What
I wished to know was," referring to a slip of paper he held in his
hand, and shaking so much he could hardly adjust his glasses to his
eyes, "whether you, Wilson, can explain how Barton came possessed of
your gun. I believe you refused this explanation to Mr. Bridgenorth."

"I did, sir! If I had said what I knew then, I saw it would criminate
Barton, and so I refused telling aught. To you, sir, now I will tell
every thing and any thing; only it is but little. The gun was my
father's before it was mine, and long ago he and John Barton had a
fancy for shooting at the gallery; and they used always to take this
gun, and brag that though it was old-fashioned it was sure."

Jem saw with self-upbraiding pain how Mr. Carson winced at these last
words, but at each irrepressible and involuntary evidence of feeling,
the hearts of the two men warmed towards him. Jem went on speaking.

"One day in the week--I think it was on the Wednesday,--yes, it
was,--it was on St. Patrick's day, I met John just coming out of our
house, as I were going to my dinner. Mother was out, and he'd found
no one in. He said he'd come to borrow the old gun, and that he'd
have made bold, and taken it, but it was not to be seen. Mother was
afraid of it, so after father's death (for while he were alive, she
seemed to think he could manage it) I had carried it to my own room.
I went up and fetched it for John, who stood outside the door all the
time."

"What did he say he wanted it for?" asked Mr. Carson, hastily.

"I don't think he spoke when I gave it him. At first he muttered
something about the shooting-gallery, and I never doubted but that it
were for practice there, as I knew he had done years before."

Mr. Carson had strung up his frame to an attitude of upright
attention while Jem was speaking; now the tension relaxed, and he
sank back in his chair, weak and powerless.

He rose up again, however, as Jem went on, anxious to give every
particular which could satisfy the bereaved father.

"I never knew for what he wanted the gun till I was taken up,--I do
not know yet why he wanted it. No one would have had me get out of
the scrape by implicating an old friend,--my father's old friend, and
the father of the girl I loved. So I refused to tell Mr. Bridgenorth
aught about it, and would not have named it now to any one but you."

Jem's face became very red at the allusion he made to Mary, but
his honest, fearless eyes had met Mr. Carson's penetrating gaze
unflinchingly, and had carried conviction of his innocence and
truthfulness. Mr. Carson felt certain that he had heard all that Jem
could tell. Accordingly he turned to Job Legh.

"You were in the room the whole time while Barton was speaking to me,
I think?"

"Yes, sir," answered Job.

"You'll excuse my asking plain and direct questions; the information
I am gaining is really a relief to my mind, I don't know how, but it
is,--will you tell me if you had any idea of Barton's guilt in this
matter before?"

"None whatever, so help me God!" said Job, solemnly. "To tell truth
(and axing your forgiveness, Jem), I had never got quite shut of the
notion that Jem here had done it. At times I was as clear of his
innocence as I was of my own; and whenever I took to reasoning about
it, I saw he could not have been the man that did it. Still I never
thought of Barton."

"And yet by his confession he must have been absent at the time,"
said Mr. Carson, referring to his slip of paper.

"Ay, and for many a day after,--I can't rightly say how long. But
still, you see, one's often blind to many a thing that lies right
under one's nose, till it's pointed out. And till I heard what John
Barton had to say yon night, I could not have seen what reason he had
for doing it; while in the case of Jem, any one who looked at Mary
Barton might have seen a cause for jealousy, clear enough."

"Then you believe that Barton had no knowledge of my son's
unfortunate,--" he looked at Jem, "of his attentions to Mary Barton.
This young man, Wilson, had heard of them, you see."

"The person who told me said clearly she neither had, nor would tell
Mary's father," interposed Jem. "I don't believe he'd ever heard of
it; he weren't a man to keep still in such a matter, if he had."

"Besides," said Job, "the reason he gave on his death-bed, so to
speak, was enough; 'specially to those who knew him."

"You mean his feelings regarding the treatment of the workmen by the
masters; you think he acted from motives of revenge, in consequence
of the part my son had taken in putting down the strike?"

"Well, sir," replied Job, "it's hard to say: John Barton was not a
man to take counsel with people; nor did he make many words about his
doings. So I can only judge from his way of thinking and talking in
general, never having heard him breathe a syllable concerning this
matter in particular. You see he were sadly put about to make great
riches and great poverty square with Christ's Gospel"--Job paused, in
order to try and express what was clear enough in his own mind, as to
the effect produced on John Barton by the great and mocking contrasts
presented by the varieties of human condition. Before he could find
suitable words to explain his meaning, Mr. Carson spoke.

"You mean he was an Owenite; all for equality and community of goods,
and that kind of absurdity."

"No, no! John Barton was no fool. No need to tell him that were
all men equal to-night, some would get the start by rising an hour
earlier to-morrow. Nor yet did he care for goods, nor wealth--no man
less, so that he could get daily bread for him and his; but what hurt
him sore, and rankled in him as long as I knew him (and, sir, it
rankles in many a poor man's heart far more than the want of any
creature-comforts, and puts a sting into starvation itself), was that
those who wore finer clothes, and eat better food, and had more money
in their pockets, kept him at arm's length, and cared not whether his
heart was sorry or glad; whether he lived or died,--whether he was
bound for heaven or hell. It seemed hard to him that a heap of gold
should part him and his brother so far asunder. For he was a loving
man before he grew mad with seeing such as he was slighted, as if
Christ Himself had not been poor. At one time, I've heard him say, he
felt kindly towards every man, rich or poor, because he thought they
were all men alike. But latterly he grew aggravated with the sorrows
and suffering that he saw, and which he thought the masters might
help if they would."

"That's the notion you've all of you got," said Mr. Carson. "Now,
how in the world can we help it? We cannot regulate the demand for
labour. No man or set of men can do it. It depends on events which
God alone can control. When there is no market for our goods, we
suffer just as much as you can do."

"Not as much, I'm sure, sir; though I'm not given to Political
Economy, I know that much. I'm wanting in learning, I'm aware; but I
can use my eyes. I never see the masters getting thin and haggard for
want of food; I hardly ever see them making much change in their way
of living, though I don't doubt they've got to do it in bad times.
But it's in things for show they cut short; while for such as me,
it's in things for life we've to stint. For sure, sir, you'll own
it's come to a hard pass when a man would give aught in the world for
work to keep his children from starving, and can't get a bit, if he's
ever so willing to labour. I'm not up to talking as John Barton would
have done, but that's clear to me at any rate."

"My good man, just listen to me. Two men live in solitude; one
produces loaves of bread, the other coats,--or what you will. Now,
would it not be hard if the bread-producer were forced to give bread
for the coats, whether he wanted them or not, in order to furnish
employment to the other? That is the simple form of the case; you've
only to multiply the numbers. There will come times of great changes
in the occupation of thousands, when improvements in manufactures and
machinery are made.--It's all nonsense talking,--it must be so!"

Job Legh pondered a few moments.

"It's true it was a sore time for the hand-loom weavers when
power-looms came in: them new-fangled things make a man's life like a
lottery; and yet I'll never misdoubt that power-looms, and railways,
and all such-like inventions, are the gifts of God. I have lived long
enough, too, to see that it is part of His plan to send suffering to
bring out a higher good; but surely it's also part of His plan that
as much of the burden of the suffering as can be, should be lightened
by those whom it is His pleasure to make happy, and content in their
own circumstances. Of course it would take a deal more thought and
wisdom than me, or any other man has, to settle out of hand how this
should be done. But I'm clear about this, when God gives a blessing
to be enjoyed, He gives it with a duty to be done; and the duty of
the happy is to help the suffering to bear their woe."

"Still, facts have proved and are daily proving how much better it is
for every man to be independent of help, and self-reliant," said Mr.
Carson, thoughtfully.

"You can never work facts as you would fixed quantities, and say,
given two facts, and the product is so and so. God has given men
feelings and passions which cannot be worked into the problem,
because they are for ever changing and uncertain. God has also made
some weak; not in any one way, but in all. One is weak in body,
another in mind, another in steadiness of purpose, a fourth can't
tell right from wrong, and so on; or if he can tell the right, he
wants strength to hold by it. Now to my thinking, them that is strong
in any of God's gifts is meant to help the weak,--be hanged to the
facts! I ask your pardon, sir; I can't rightly explain the meaning
that is in me. I'm like a tap as won't run, but keeps letting it
out drop by drop, so that you've no notion of the force of what's
within."

Job looked and felt very sorrowful at the want of power in his words,
while the feeling within him was so strong and clear.

"What you say is very true, no doubt," replied Mr. Carson; "but
how would you bring it to bear upon the masters' conduct,--on my
particular case?" added he, gravely.

"I'm not learned enough to argue. Thoughts come into my head that
I'm sure are as true as Gospel, though may be they don't follow each
other like the Q. E. D. of a Proposition. The masters has it on their
own conscience,--you have it on yours, sir, to answer for to God
whether you've done, and are doing all in your power to lighten the
evils that seem always to hang on the trades by which you make your
fortunes. It's no business of mine, thank God. John Barton took the
question in hand, and his answer to it was NO! Then he grew bitter,
and angry, and mad; and in his madness he did a great sin, and
wrought a great woe; and repented him with tears as of blood; and
will go through his penance humbly and meekly in t'other place,
I'll be bound. I never seed such bitter repentance as his that last
night."

There was a silence of many minutes. Mr. Carson had covered his face,
and seemed utterly forgetful of their presence; and yet they did not
like to disturb him by rising to leave the room.

At last he said, without meeting their sympathetic eyes,

"Thank you both for coming,--and for speaking candidly to me. I fear,
Legh, neither you nor I have convinced each other, as to the power,
or want of power, in the masters to remedy the evils the men complain
of."

"I'm loth to vex you, sir, just now; but it was not the want of
power I was talking on; what we all feel sharpest is the want of
inclination to try and help the evils which come like blights at
times over the manufacturing places, while we see the masters can
stop work and not suffer. If we saw the masters try for our sakes to
find a remedy,--even if they were long about it,--even if they could
find no help, and at the end of all could only say, 'Poor fellows,
our hearts are sore for ye; we've done all we could, and can't find
a cure,'--we'd bear up like men through bad times. No one knows till
they've tried, what power of bearing lies in them, if once they
believe that men are caring for their sorrows and will help if they
can. If fellow-creatures can give nought but tears and brave words,
we take our trials straight from God, and we know enough of His love
to put ourselves blind into His hands. You say our talk has done no
good. I say it has. I see the view you take of things from the place
where you stand. I can remember that, when the time comes for judging
you; I sha'n't think any longer, does he act right on my views of a
thing, but does he act right on his own. It has done me good in that
way. I'm an old man, and may never see you again; but I'll pray for
you, and think on you and your trials, both of your great wealth, and
of your son's cruel death, many and many a day to come; and I'll ask
God to bless both to you now and for evermore. Amen. Farewell!"

Jem had maintained a manly and dignified reserve ever since he had
made his open statement of all he knew. Now both the men rose and
bowed low, looking at Mr. Carson with the deep human interest they
could not fail to take in one who had endured and forgiven a deep
injury; and who struggled hard, as it was evident he did, to bear up
like a man under his affliction.

He bowed low in return to them. Then he suddenly came forward and
shook them by the hand; and thus, without a word more, they parted.

There are stages in the contemplation and endurance of great sorrow,
which endow men with the same earnestness and clearness of thought
that in some of old took the form of Prophecy. To those who have
large capability of loving and suffering, united with great power of
firm endurance, there comes a time in their woe, when they are lifted
out of the contemplation of their individual case into a searching
inquiry into the nature of their calamity, and the remedy (if remedy
there be) which may prevent its recurrence to others as well as to
themselves.

Hence the beautiful, noble efforts which are from time to time
brought to light, as being continuously made by those who have once
hung on the cross of agony, in order that others may not suffer as
they have done; one of the grandest ends which sorrow can accomplish;
the sufferer wrestling with God's messenger until a blessing is left
behind, not for one alone but for generations.

It took time before the stern nature of Mr. Carson was compelled to
the recognition of this secret of comfort, and that same sternness
prevented his reaping any benefit in public estimation from the
actions he performed; for the character is more easily changed than
the habits and manners originally formed by that character, and to
his dying day Mr. Carson was considered hard and cold by those who
only casually saw him, or superficially knew him. But those who were
admitted into his confidence were aware, that the wish which lay
nearest to his heart was that none might suffer from the cause from
which he had suffered; that a perfect understanding, and complete
confidence and love, might exist between masters and men; that
the truth might be recognised that the interests of one were the
interests of all, and as such, required the consideration and
deliberation of all; that hence it was most desirable to have
educated workers, capable of judging, not mere machines of ignorant
men; and to have them bound to their employers by the ties of respect
and affection, not by mere money bargains alone; in short, to
acknowledge the Spirit of Christ as the regulating law between both
parties.

Many of the improvements now in practice in the system of employment
in Manchester, owe their origin to short, earnest sentences spoken
by Mr. Carson. Many and many yet to be carried into execution, take
their birth from that stern, thoughtful mind, which submitted to be
taught by suffering.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

CONCLUSION.


   "Touch us gently, gentle Time!
     We've not proud nor soaring wings,
   Our ambition, our content,
     Lies in simple things;
   Humble voyagers are we
   O'er life's dim unsounded sea;
     Touch us gently, gentle Time!"

   BARRY CORNWALL.


Not many days after John Barton's funeral was over, all was arranged
respecting Jem's appointment at Toronto; and the time was fixed
for his sailing. It was to take place almost immediately: yet much
remained to be done; many domestic preparations were to be made; and
one great obstacle, anticipated by both Jem and Mary, to be removed.
This was the opposition they expected from Mrs. Wilson, to whom the
plan had never yet been named.

They were most anxious that their home should continue ever to be
hers, yet they feared that her dislike to a new country might be
an insuperable objection to this. At last Jem took advantage of an
evening of unusual placidity, as he sat alone with his mother just
before going to bed, to broach the subject; and to his surprise she
acceded willingly to his proposition of her accompanying himself and
his wife.

"To be sure 'Merica is a long way to flit to; beyond London a good
bit I reckon; and quite in foreign parts; but I've never had no
opinion of England, ever since they could be such fools as take up a
quiet chap like thee, and clap thee in prison. Where you go, I'll go.
Perhaps in them Indian countries they'll know a well-behaved lad when
they see him; ne'er speak a word more, lad, I'll go."

Their path became daily more smooth and easy; the present was clear
and practicable, the future was hopeful; they had leisure of mind
enough to turn to the past.

"Jem!" said Mary to him, one evening as they sat in the twilight,
talking together in low happy voices till Margaret should come to
keep Mary company through the night, "Jem! you've never yet told
me how you came to know about my naughty ways with poor young Mr.
Carson." She blushed for shame at the remembrance of her folly, and
hid her head on his shoulder while he made answer.

"Darling, I'm almost loth to tell you; your aunt Esther told me."

"Ah, I remember! but how did she know? I was so put about that night
I did not think of asking her. Where did you see her? I've forgotten
where she lives."

Mary said all this in so open and innocent a manner, that Jem felt
sure she knew not the truth respecting Esther, and he half hesitated
to tell her. At length he replied,

"Where did you see Esther lately? When? Tell me, love, for you've
never named it before, and I can't make it out."

"Oh! it was that horrible night which is like a dream." And she told
him of Esther's midnight visit, concluding with, "We must go and see
her before we leave, though I don't rightly know where to find her."

"Dearest Mary,--"

"What, Jem?" exclaimed she, alarmed by his hesitation.

"Your poor aunt Esther has no home:--she's one of them miserable
creatures that walk the streets." And he in his turn told of his
encounter with Esther, with so many details that Mary was forced to
be convinced, although her heart rebelled against the belief.

"Jem, lad!" said she, vehemently, "we must find her out,--we must
hunt her up!" She rose as if she was going on the search there and
then.

"What could we do, darling?" asked he, fondly restraining her.

"Do! Why! what could we _not_ do, if we could but find her? She's
none so happy in her ways, think ye, but what she'd turn from them,
if any one would lend her a helping hand. Don't hold me, Jem; this
is just the time for such as her to be out, and who knows but what
I might find her close at hand."

"Stay, Mary, for a minute; I'll go out now and search for her if you
wish, though it's but a wild chase. You must not go. It would be
better to ask the police to-morrow. But if I should find her, how can
I make her come with me? Once before she refused, and said she could
not break off her drinking ways, come what might?"

"You never will persuade her if you fear and doubt," said Mary, in
tears. "Hope yourself, and trust to the good that must be in her.
Speak to that,--she has it in her yet,--oh, bring her home, and we
will love her so, we'll make her good."

"Yes!" said Jem, catching Mary's sanguine spirit; "she shall go to
America with us; and we'll help her to get rid of her sins. I'll go
now, my precious darling, and if I can't find her, it's but trying
the police to-morrow. Take care of your own sweet self, Mary," said
he, fondly kissing her before he went out.

It was not to be. Jem wandered far and wide that night, but never
met Esther. The next day he applied to the police; and at last they
recognised under his description of her, a woman known to them
under the name of the "Butterfly," from the gaiety of her dress
a year or two ago. By their help he traced out one of her haunts,
a low lodging-house behind Peter Street. He and his companion, a
kind-hearted policeman, were admitted, suspiciously enough, by the
landlady, who ushered them into a large garret where twenty or
thirty people of all ages and both sexes lay and dozed away the day,
choosing the evening and night for their trades of beggary, thieving,
or prostitution.

"I know the Butterfly was here," said she, looking round. "She came
in, the night before last, and said she had not a penny to get a
place for shelter; and that if she was far away in the country she
could steal aside and die in a copse, or a clough, like the wild
animals; but here the police would let no one alone in the streets,
and she wanted a spot to die in, in peace. It's a queer sort of peace
we have here, but that night the room was uncommon empty, and I'm not
a hard-hearted woman (I wish I were, I could ha' made a good thing
out of it afore this if I were harder), so I sent her up,--but she's
not here now, I think."

"Was she very bad?" asked Jem.

"Ay! nought but skin and bone, with a cough to tear her in two."

They made some inquiries, and found that in the restlessness of
approaching death, she had longed to be once more in the open air,
and had gone forth,--where, no one seemed to be able to tell.

Leaving many messages for her, and directions that he was to be sent
for if either the policeman or the landlady obtained any clue to her
where-abouts, Jem bent his steps towards Mary's house; for he had not
seen her all that long day of search. He told her of his proceedings
and want of success; and both were saddened at the recital, and sat
silent for some time.

After a while they began talking over their plans. In a day or two,
Mary was to give up house, and go and live for a week or so with
Job Legh, until the time of her marriage, which would take place
immediately before sailing; they talked themselves back into silence
and delicious reverie. Mary sat by Jem, his arm round her waist, her
head on his shoulder; and thought over the scenes which had passed in
that home she was so soon to leave for ever.

Suddenly she felt Jem start, and started too without knowing why; she
tried to see his countenance, but the shades of evening had deepened
so much she could read no expression there. It was turned to the
window; she looked and saw a white face pressed against the panes on
the outside, gazing intently into the dusky chamber.

While they watched, as if fascinated by the appearance, and unable to
think or stir, a film came over the bright, feverish, glittering eyes
outside, and the form sank down to the ground without a struggle of
instinctive resistance.

"It is Esther!" exclaimed they, both at once. They rushed
outside; and, fallen into what appeared simply a heap of white or
light-coloured clothes, fainting or dead, lay the poor crushed
Butterfly--the once innocent Esther.

She had come (as a wounded deer drags its heavy limbs once more to
the green coolness of the lair in which it was born, there to die) to
see the place familiar to her innocence, yet once again before her
death. Whether she was indeed alive or dead, they knew not now.

Job came in with Margaret, for it was bed-time. He said Esther's
pulse beat a little yet. They carried her upstairs and laid her
on Mary's bed, not daring to undress her, lest any motion should
frighten the trembling life away; but it was all in vain.

Towards midnight, she opened wide her eyes and looked around on the
once familiar room; Job Legh knelt by the bed praying aloud and
fervently for her, but he stopped as he saw her roused look. She sat
up in bed with a sudden convulsive motion.

"Has it been a dream then?" asked she wildly. Then with a habit,
which came like instinct even in that awful dying hour, her hand
sought for a locket which hung concealed in her bosom, and, finding
that, she knew all was true which had befallen her since last she lay
an innocent girl on that bed.

She fell back, and spoke word never more. She held the locket
containing her child's hair still in her hand, and once or twice she
kissed it with a long soft kiss. She cried feebly and sadly as long
as she had any strength to cry, and then she died.

They laid her in one grave with John Barton. And there they lie
without name, or initial, or date. Only this verse is inscribed upon
the stone which covers the remains of these two wanderers.

Psalm ciii. v. 9.--"For He will not always chide, neither will He
keep His anger for ever."


I see a long, low, wooden house, with room enough and to spare. The
old primeval trees are felled and gone for many a mile around; one
alone remains to overshadow the gable-end of the cottage. There is a
garden around the dwelling, and far beyond that stretches an orchard.
The glory of an Indian summer is over all, making the heart leap at
the sight of its gorgeous beauty.

At the door of the house, looking towards the town, stands Mary,
watching for the return of her husband from his daily work; and while
she watches, she listens, smiling;

   "Clap hands, daddy comes,
   With his pocket full of plums,
   And a cake for Johnnie."

Then comes a crow of delight from Johnnie. Then his grandmother
carries him to the door, and glories in seeing him resist his
mother's blandishments to cling to her.

"English letters! 'Twas that made me so late!"

"Oh, Jem, Jem! don't hold them so tight! What do they say?"

"Why, some good news. Come, give a guess what it is."

"Oh, tell me! I cannot guess," said Mary.

"Then you give it up, do you? What do you say, mother?"

Jane Wilson thought a moment.

"Will and Margaret are married?" asked she.

"Not exactly,--but very near. The old woman has twice the spirit of
the young one. Come, Mary, give a guess!"

He covered his little boy's eyes with his hands for an instant,
significantly, till the baby pushed them down, saying in his
imperfect way,

"Tan't see."

"There now! Johnnie can see. Do you guess, Mary?"

"They've done something to Margaret to give her back her sight!"
exclaimed she.

"They have. She has been couched, and can see as well as ever. She
and Will are to be married on the twenty-fifth of this month, and
he's bringing her out here next voyage; and Job Legh talks of coming
too,--not to see you, Mary,--nor you, mother,--nor you, my little
hero" (kissing him), "but to try and pick up a few specimens of
Canadian insects, Will says. All the compliment is to the earwigs,
you see, mother!"

"Dear Job Legh!" said Mary, softly and seriously.




CHAPTER I.

THE DAWN OF A GALA DAY.



To begin with the old rigmarole of childhood. In a country there was
a shire, and in that shire there was a town, and in that town there
was a house, and in that house there was a room, and in that room
there was a bed, and in that bed there lay a little girl; wide awake
and longing to get up, but not daring to do so for fear of the unseen
power in the next room--a certain Betty, whose slumbers must not
be disturbed until six o'clock struck, when she wakened of herself
"as sure as clockwork," and left the household very little peace
afterwards. It was a June morning, and early as it was, the room was
full of sunny warmth and light.

On the drawers opposite to the little white dimity bed in which Molly
Gibson lay, was a primitive kind of bonnet-stand on which was hung a
bonnet, carefully covered over from any chance of dust with a large
cotton handkerchief, of so heavy and serviceable a texture that if
the thing underneath it had been a flimsy fabric of gauze and lace
and flowers, it would have been altogether "scomfished" (again to
quote from Betty's vocabulary). But the bonnet was made of solid
straw, and its only trimming was a plain white ribbon put over the
crown, and forming the strings. Still, there was a neat little
quilling inside, every plait of which Molly knew, for had she not
made it herself the evening before, with infinite pains? and was
there not a little blue bow in this quilling, the very first bit of
such finery Molly had ever had the prospect of wearing?

Six o'clock now! the pleasant, brisk ringing of the church bells told
that; calling every one to their daily work, as they had done for
hundreds of years. Up jumped Molly, and ran with her bare little feet
across the room, and lifted off the handkerchief and saw once again
the bonnet; the pledge of the gay bright day to come. Then to the
window, and after some tugging she opened the casement, and let in
the sweet morning air. The dew was already off the flowers in the
garden below, but still rising from the long hay-grass in the meadows
directly beyond. At one side lay the little town of Hollingford,
into a street of which Mr. Gibson's front door opened; and delicate
columns, and little puffs of smoke were already beginning to rise
from many a cottage chimney where some housewife was already up, and
preparing breakfast for the bread-winner of the family.

Molly Gibson saw all this, but all she thought about it was, "Oh! it
will be a fine day! I was afraid it never, never would come; or that,
if it ever came, it would be a rainy day!" Five-and-forty years ago,
children's pleasures in a country town were very simple, and Molly
had lived for twelve long years without the occurrence of any event
so great as that which was now impending. Poor child! it is true
that she had lost her mother, which was a jar to the whole tenour of
her life; but that was hardly an event in the sense referred to; and
besides, she had been too young to be conscious of it at the time.
The pleasure she was looking forward to to-day was her first share in
a kind of annual festival in Hollingford.

The little straggling town faded away into country on one side close
to the entrance-lodge of a great park, where lived my Lord and Lady
Cumnor: "the earl" and "the countess," as they were always called by
the inhabitants of the town; where a very pretty amount of feudal
feeling still lingered, and showed itself in a number of simple ways,
droll enough to look back upon, but serious matters of importance
at the time. It was before the passing of the Reform Bill, but a
good deal of liberal talk took place occasionally between two or
three of the more enlightened freeholders living in Hollingford;
and there was a great Tory family in the county who, from time to
time, came forward and contested the election with the rival Whig
family of Cumnor. One would have thought that the above-mentioned
liberal-talking inhabitants would have, at least, admitted the
possibility of their voting for the Hely-Harrison, and thus trying to
vindicate their independence. But no such thing. "The earl" was lord
of the manor, and owner of much of the land on which Hollingford was
built; he and his household were fed, and doctored, and, to a certain
measure, clothed by the good people of the town; their fathers'
grandfathers had always voted for the eldest son of Cumnor Towers,
and following in the ancestral track, every man-jack in the place
gave his vote to the liege lord, totally irrespective of such
chimeras as political opinion.

This was no unusual instance of the influence of the great
land-owners over humbler neighbours in those days before railways,
and it was well for a place where the powerful family, who thus
overshadowed it, were of so respectable a character as the Cumnors.
They expected to be submitted to, and obeyed; the simple worship of
the townspeople was accepted by the earl and countess as a right; and
they would have stood still in amazement, and with a horrid memory
of the French sansculottes who were the bugbears of their youth, had
any inhabitant of Hollingford ventured to set his will or opinions
in opposition to those of the earl. But, yielded all that obeisance,
they did a good deal for the town, and were generally condescending,
and often thoughtful and kind in their treatment of their vassals.
Lord Cumnor was a forbearing landlord; putting his steward a little
on one side sometimes, and taking the reins into his own hands now
and then, much to the annoyance of the agent, who was, in fact, too
rich and independent to care greatly for preserving a post where his
decisions might any day be overturned by my lord's taking a fancy
to go "pottering" (as the agent irreverently expressed it in the
sanctuary of his own home), which, being interpreted, meant that
occasionally the earl asked his own questions of his own tenants,
and used his own eyes and ears in the management of the smaller
details of his property. But his tenants liked my lord all the better
for this habit of his. Lord Cumnor had certainly a little time for
gossip, which he contrived to combine with the failing of personal
intervention between the old land-steward and the tenantry. But,
then, the countess made up by her unapproachable dignity for this
weakness of the earl's. Once a year she was condescending. She and
the ladies, her daughters, had set up a school; not a school after
the manner of schools now-a-days, where far better intellectual
teaching is given to the boys and girls of labourers and work-people
than often falls to the lot of their betters in worldly estate; but
a school of the kind we should call "industrial," where girls are
taught to sew beautifully, to be capital housemaids, and pretty fair
cooks, and, above all, to dress neatly in a kind of charity uniform
devised by the ladies of Cumnor Towers;--white caps, white tippets,
check aprons, blue gowns, and ready curtseys, and "please, ma'ams,"
being _de rigueur_.

Now, as the countess was absent from the Towers for a considerable
part of the year, she was glad to enlist the sympathy of the
Hollingford ladies in this school, with a view to obtaining their aid
as visitors during the many months that she and her daughters were
away. And the various unoccupied gentlewomen of the town responded to
the call of their liege lady, and gave her their service as required;
and along with it, a great deal of whispered and fussy admiration.
"How good of the countess! So like the dear countess--always thinking
of others!" and so on; while it was always supposed that no strangers
had seen Hollingford properly, unless they had been taken to the
countess's school, and been duly impressed by the neat little pupils,
and the still neater needlework there to be inspected. In return,
there was a day of honour set apart every summer, when with much
gracious and stately hospitality, Lady Cumnor and her daughters
received all the school visitors at the Towers, the great family
mansion standing in aristocratic seclusion in the centre of the large
park, of which one of the lodges was close to the little town. The
order of this annual festivity was this. About ten o'clock one of the
Towers' carriages rolled through the lodge, and drove to different
houses, wherein dwelt a woman to be honoured; picking them up by ones
or twos, till the loaded carriage drove back again through the ready
portals, bowled along the smooth tree-shaded road, and deposited its
covey of smartly-dressed ladies on the great flight of steps leading
to the ponderous doors of Cumnor Towers. Back again to the town;
another picking up of womankind in their best clothes, and another
return, and so on till the whole party were assembled either in the
house or in the really beautiful gardens. After the proper amount of
exhibition on the one part, and admiration on the other, had been
done, there was a collation for the visitors, and some more display
and admiration of the treasures inside the house. Towards four
o'clock, coffee was brought round; and this was a signal of the
approaching carriage that was to take them back to their own homes;
whither they returned with the happy consciousness of a well-spent
day, but with some fatigue at the long-continued exertion of behaving
their best, and talking on stilts for so many hours. Nor were
Lady Cumnor and her daughters free from something of the same
self-approbation, and something, too, of the same fatigue; the
fatigue that always follows on conscious efforts to behave as will
best please the society you are in.

For the first time in her life, Molly Gibson was to be included among
the guests at the Towers. She was much too young to be a visitor at
the school, so it was not on that account that she was to go; but it
had so happened that one day when Lord Cumnor was on a "pottering"
expedition, he had met Mr. Gibson, _the_ doctor of the neighbourhood,
coming out of the farm-house my lord was entering; and having some
small question to ask the surgeon (Lord Cumnor seldom passed any
one of his acquaintance without asking a question of some sort--not
always attending to the answer; it was his mode of conversation), he
accompanied Mr. Gibson to the out-building, to a ring in the wall of
which the surgeon's horse was fastened. Molly was there too, sitting
square and quiet on her rough little pony, waiting for her father.
Her grave eyes opened large and wide at the close neighbourhood and
evident advance of "the earl;" for to her little imagination the
grey-haired, red-faced, somewhat clumsy man, was a cross between an
arch-angel and a king.

"Your daughter, eh, Gibson?--nice little girl, how old? Pony wants
grooming though," patting it as he talked. "What's your name,
my dear? He's sadly behindhand with his rent, as I was saying,
but if he's really ill, I must see after Sheepshanks, who is a
hardish man of business. What's his complaint? You'll come to our
school-scrimmage on Thursday, little girl--what's-your-name? Mind you
send her, or bring her, Gibson; and just give a word to your groom,
for I'm sure that pony wasn't singed last year, now, was he? Don't
forget Thursday, little girl--what's-your-name?--it's a promise
between us, is it not?" And off the earl trotted, attracted by the
sight of the farmer's eldest son on the other side of the yard.

Mr. Gibson mounted, and he and Molly rode off. They did not speak
for some time. Then she said, "May I go, papa?" in rather an anxious
little tone of voice.

"Where, my dear?" said he, wakening up out of his own professional
thoughts.

"To the Towers--on Thursday, you know. That gentleman" (she was shy
of calling him by his title), "asked me."

"Would you like it, my dear? It has always seemed to me rather a
tiresome piece of gaiety--rather a tiring day, I mean--beginning so
early--and the heat, and all that."

"Oh, papa!" said Molly, reproachfully.

"You'd like to go then, would you?"

"Yes; if I may!--He asked me, you know. Don't you think I may?--he
asked me twice over."

"Well! we'll see--yes! I think we can manage it, if you wish it so
much, Molly."

Then they were silent again. By-and-by, Molly said,--

"Please, papa--I do wish to go,--but I don't care about it."

"That's rather a puzzling speech. But I suppose you mean you don't
care to go, if it will be any trouble to get you there. I can easily
manage it, however, so you may consider it settled. You'll want a
white frock, remember; you'd better tell Betty you're going, and
she'll see after making you tidy."

Now, there were two or three things to be done by Mr. Gibson, before
he could feel quite comfortable about Molly's going to the festival
at the Towers, and each of them involved a little trouble on his
part. But he was very willing to gratify his little girl; so the
next day he rode over to the Towers, ostensibly to visit some sick
housemaid, but, in reality, to throw himself in my lady's way, and
get her to ratify Lord Cumnor's invitation to Molly. He chose his
time, with a little natural diplomacy; which, indeed, he had often
to exercise in his intercourse with the great family. He rode into
the stable-yard about twelve o'clock, a little before luncheon-time,
and yet after the worry of opening the post-bag and discussing its
contents was over. After he had put up his horse, he went in by the
back-way to the house; the "House" on this side, the "Towers" at the
front. He saw his patient, gave his directions to the housekeeper,
and then went out, with a rare wild-flower in his hand, to find one
of the ladies Tranmere in the garden, where, according to his hope
and calculation, he came upon Lady Cumnor too,--now talking to her
daughter about the contents of an open letter which she held in her
hand, now directing a gardener about certain bedding-out plants.

"I was calling to see Nanny, and I took the opportunity of bringing
Lady Agnes the plant I was telling her about as growing on Cumnor
Moss."

"Thank you, so much, Mr. Gibson. Mamma, look! this is the _Drosera
rotundifolia_ I have been wanting so long."

"Ah! yes; very pretty I daresay, only I am no botanist. Nanny is
better, I hope? We can't have any one laid up next week, for the
house will be quite full of people,--and here are the Danbys waiting
to offer themselves as well. One comes down for a fortnight of quiet,
at Whitsuntide, and leaves half one's establishment in town, and as
soon as people know of our being here, we get letters without end,
longing for a breath of country air, or saying how lovely the Towers
must look in spring; and I must own, Lord Cumnor is a great deal to
blame for it all, for as soon as ever we are down here, he rides
about to all the neighbours, and invites them to come over and spend
a few days."

"We shall go back to town on Friday the 18th," said Lady Agnes, in a
consolatory tone.

"Ah, yes! as soon as we have got over the school visitors' affair.
But it is a week to that happy day."

"By the way!" said Mr. Gibson, availing himself of the good opening
thus presented, "I met my lord at the Cross-trees Farm yesterday, and
he was kind enough to ask my little daughter, who was with me, to be
one of the party here on Thursday; it would give the lassie great
pleasure, I believe." He paused for Lady Cumnor to speak.

"Oh, well! if my lord asked her, I suppose she must come, but I wish
he was not so amazingly hospitable! Not but what the little girl will
be quite welcome; only, you see, he met a younger Miss Browning the
other day, of whose existence I had never heard."

"She visits at the school, mamma," said Lady Agnes.

"Well, perhaps she does; I never said she did not. I knew there was
one visitor of the name of Browning; I never knew there were two,
but, of course, as soon as Lord Cumnor heard there was another, he
must needs ask her; so the carriage will have to go backwards and
forwards four times now to fetch them all. So your daughter can come
quite easily, Mr. Gibson, and I shall be very glad to see her for
your sake. She can sit bodkin with the Brownings, I suppose? You'll
arrange it all with them; and mind you get Nanny well up to her work
next week."

Just as Mr. Gibson was going away, Lady Cumnor called after him, "Oh!
by-the-by, Clare is here; you remember Clare, don't you? She was a
patient of yours, long ago."

"Clare," he repeated, in a bewildered tone.

"Don't you recollect her? Miss Clare, our old governess," said Lady
Agnes. "About twelve or fourteen years ago, before Lady Cuxhaven was
married."

"Oh, yes!" said he. "Miss Clare, who had the scarlet fever here; a
very pretty delicate girl. But I thought she was married!"

"Yes!" said Lady Cumnor. "She was a silly little thing, and did
not know when she was well off; we were all very fond of her, I'm
sure. She went and married a poor curate, and became a stupid Mrs.
Kirkpatrick; but we always kept on calling her 'Clare.' And now
he's dead, and left her a widow, and she is staying here; and we
are racking our brains to find out some way of helping her to a
livelihood without parting her from her child. She's somewhere about
the grounds, if you like to renew your acquaintance with her."

"Thank you, my lady. I'm afraid I cannot stop to-day. I have a long
round to go; I've stayed here too long as it is, I'm afraid."

Long as his ride had been that day, he called on the Miss Brownings
in the evening, to arrange about Molly's accompanying them to the
Towers. They were tall handsome women, past their first youth, and
inclined to be extremely complaisant to the widowed doctor.

"Eh dear! Mr. Gibson, but we shall be delighted to have her with us.
You should never have thought of asking us such a thing," said Miss
Browning the elder.

"I'm sure I'm hardly sleeping at nights for thinking of it," said
Miss Phoebe. "You know I've never been there before. Sister has
many a time; but somehow, though my name has been down on the
visitors' list these three years, the countess has never named me in
her note; and you know I could not push myself into notice, and go to
such a grand place without being asked; how could I?"

"I told Phoebe last year," said her sister, "that I was sure it was
only inadvertence, as one may call it, on the part of the countess,
and that her ladyship would be as hurt as any one when she didn't
see Phoebe among the school visitors; but Phoebe has got a delicate
mind, you see, Mr. Gibson, and all I could say she wouldn't go, but
stopped here at home; and it spoilt all my pleasure all that day,
I do assure you, to think of Phoebe's face, as I saw it over the
window-blinds, as I rode away; her eyes were full of tears, if you'll
believe me."

"I had a good cry after you was gone, Dorothy," said Miss Phoebe;
"but for all that, I think I was right in stopping away from where
I was not asked. Don't you, Mr. Gibson?"

"Certainly," said he. "And you see you are going this year; and last
year it rained."

"Yes! I remember! I set myself to tidy my drawers, to string myself
up, as it were; and I was so taken up with what I was about that
I was quite startled when I heard the rain beating against the
window-panes. 'Goodness me!' said I to myself, 'whatever will become
of sister's white satin shoes, if she has to walk about on soppy
grass after such rain as this?' for, you see, I thought a deal about
her having a pair of smart shoes; and this year she has gone and got
me a white satin pair just as smart as hers, for a surprise."

"Molly will know she's to put on her best clothes," said Miss
Browning. "We could perhaps lend her a few beads, or artificials, if
she wants them."

"Molly must go in a clean white frock," said Mr. Gibson, rather
hastily; for he did not admire the Miss Brownings' taste in dress,
and was unwilling to have his child decked up according to their
fancy; he esteemed his old servant Betty's as the more correct,
because the more simple. Miss Browning had just a shade of annoyance
in her tone as she drew herself up, and said, "Oh! very well. It's
quite right, I'm sure." But Miss Phoebe said, "Molly will look very
nice in whatever she puts on, that's certain."




CHAPTER II.

A NOVICE AMONGST THE GREAT FOLK.


At ten o'clock on the eventful Thursday the Towers' carriage began
its work. Molly was ready long before it made its first appearance,
although it had been settled that she and the Miss Brownings were not
to go until the last, or fourth, time of its coming. Her face had
been soaped, scrubbed, and shone brilliantly clean; her frills, her
frock, her ribbons were all snow-white. She had on a black mode cloak
that had been her mother's; it was trimmed round with rich lace, and
looked quaint and old-fashioned on the child. For the first time in
her life she wore kid gloves; hitherto she had only had cotton ones.
Her gloves were far too large for the little dimpled fingers, but as
Betty had told her they were to last her for years, it was all very
well. She trembled many a time, and almost turned faint once with the
long expectation of the morning. Betty might say what she liked about
a watched pot never boiling; Molly never ceased to watch the approach
through the winding street, and after two hours the carriage came
for her at last. She had to sit very forward to avoid crushing the
Miss Brownings' new dresses; and yet not too forward, for fear of
incommoding fat Mrs. Goodenough and her niece, who occupied the
front seat of the carriage; so that altogether the fact of sitting
down at all was rather doubtful, and to add to her discomfort, Molly
felt herself to be very conspicuously placed in the centre of the
carriage, a mark for all the observation of Hollingford. It was far
too much of a gala day for the work of the little town to go forward
with its usual regularity. Maid-servants gazed out of upper windows;
shopkeepers' wives stood on the door-steps; cottagers ran out, with
babies in their arms; and little children, too young to know how
to behave respectfully at the sight of an earl's carriage, huzzaed
merrily as it bowled along. The woman at the lodge held the gate
open, and dropped a low curtsey to the liveries. And now they were
in the Park; and now they were in sight of the Towers, and silence
fell upon the carriage-full of ladies, only broken by one faint
remark from Mrs. Goodenough's niece, a stranger to the town, as they
drew up before the double semicircle flight of steps which led to the
door of the mansion.

"They call that a perron, I believe, don't they?" she asked. But
the only answer she obtained was a simultaneous "hush." It was very
awful, as Molly thought, and she half wished herself at home again.
But she lost all consciousness of herself by-and-by when the party
strolled out into the beautiful grounds, the like of which she
had never even imagined. Green velvet lawns, bathed in sunshine,
stretched away on every side into the finely wooded park; if there
were divisions and ha-has between the soft sunny sweeps of grass, and
the dark gloom of the forest-trees beyond, Molly did not see them;
and the melting away of exquisite cultivation into the wilderness
had an inexplicable charm to her. Near the house there were walls
and fences; but they were covered with climbing roses, and rare
honeysuckles and other creepers just bursting into bloom. There were
flower-beds, too, scarlet, crimson, blue, orange; masses of blossom
lying on the greensward. Molly held Miss Browning's hand very tight
as they loitered about in company with several other ladies, and
marshalled by a daughter of the Towers, who seemed half amused at the
voluble admiration showered down upon every possible thing and place.
Molly said nothing, as became her age and position, but every now and
then she relieved her full heart by drawing a deep breath, almost
like a sigh. Presently they came to the long glittering range of
greenhouses and hothouses, and an attendant gardener was there to
admit the party. Molly did not care for this half so much as for
the flowers in the open air; but Lady Agnes had a more scientific
taste, she expatiated on the rarity of this plant, and the mode of
cultivation required by that, till Molly began to feel very tired,
and then very faint. She was too shy to speak for some time; but at
length, afraid of making a greater sensation if she began to cry, or
if she fell against the stands of precious flowers, she caught at
Miss Browning's hand, and gasped out--

"May I go back, out into the garden? I can't breathe here!"

"Oh, yes, to be sure, love. I daresay it's hard understanding for
you, love; but it's very fine and instructive, and a deal of Latin in
it too."

She turned hastily round not to lose another word of Lady Agnes'
lecture on orchids, and Molly turned back and passed out of the
heated atmosphere. She felt better in the fresh air; and unobserved,
and at liberty, went from one lovely spot to another, now in the open
park, now in some shut-in flower-garden, where the song of the birds,
and the drip of the central fountain, were the only sounds, and the
tree-tops made an enclosing circle in the blue June sky; she went
along without more thought as to her whereabouts than a butterfly
has, as it skims from flower to flower, till at length she grew
very weary, and wished to return to the house, but did not know
how, and felt afraid of encountering all the strangers who would be
there, unprotected by either of the Miss Brownings. The hot sun told
upon her head, and it began to ache. She saw a great wide-spreading
cedar-tree upon a burst of lawn towards which she was advancing, and
the black repose beneath its branches lured her thither. There was
a rustic seat in the shadow, and weary Molly sate down there, and
presently fell asleep.

She was startled from her slumbers after a time, and jumped to her
feet. Two ladies were standing by her, talking about her. They were
perfect strangers to her, and with a vague conviction that she had
done something wrong, and also because she was worn-out with hunger,
fatigue, and the morning's excitement, she began to cry.

"Poor little woman! She has lost herself; she belongs to some of the
people from Hollingford, I have no doubt," said the oldest-looking of
the two ladies; she who appeared to be about forty, though she did
not really number more than thirty years. She was plain-featured, and
had rather a severe expression on her face; her dress was as rich as
any morning dress could be; her voice deep and unmodulated,--what in
a lower rank of life would have been called gruff; but that was not a
word to apply to Lady Cuxhaven, the eldest daughter of the earl and
countess. The other lady looked much younger, but she was in fact
some years the elder; at first sight Molly thought she was the most
beautiful person she had ever seen, and she was certainly a very
lovely woman. Her voice, too, was soft and plaintive, as she replied
to Lady Cuxhaven,--

"Poor little darling! she is overcome by the heat, I have no
doubt--such a heavy straw bonnet, too. Let me untie it for you, my
dear."

Molly now found voice to say--"I am Molly Gibson, please. I came here
with Miss Brownings;" for her great fear was that she should be taken
for an unauthorized intruder.

"Miss Brownings?" said Lady Cuxhaven to her companion, as if
inquiringly.

"I think they were the two tall large young women that Lady Agnes was
talking about."

"Oh, I daresay. I saw she had a number of people in tow;" then
looking again at Molly, she said, "Have you had anything to eat,
child, since you came? You look a very white little thing; or is it
the heat?"

"I have had nothing to eat," said Molly, rather piteously; for,
indeed, before she fell asleep she had been very hungry.

The two ladies spoke to each other in a low voice; then the elder
said in a voice of authority, which, indeed, she had always used in
speaking to the other, "Sit still here, my dear; we are going to the
house, and Clare shall bring you something to eat before you try to
walk back; it must be a quarter of a mile at least." So they went
away, and Molly sat upright, waiting for the promised messenger. She
did not know who Clare might be, and she did not care much for food
now; but she felt as if she could not walk without some help. At
length she saw the pretty lady coming back, followed by a footman
with a small tray.

"Look how kind Lady Cuxhaven is," said she who was called Clare. "She
chose you out this little lunch herself; and now you must try and eat
it, and you'll be quite right when you've had some food, darling--You
need not stop, Edwards; I will bring the tray back with me."

There was some bread, and some cold chicken, and some jelly, and
a glass of wine, and a bottle of sparkling water, and a bunch of
grapes. Molly put out her trembling little hand for the water; but
she was too faint to hold it. Clare put it to her mouth, and she took
a long draught and was refreshed. But she could not eat; she tried,
but she could not; her headache was too bad. Clare looked bewildered.
"Take some grapes, they will be the best for you; you must try and
eat something, or I don't know how I shall get you to the house."

"My head aches so," said Molly, lifting her heavy eyes wistfully.

"Oh, dear, how tiresome!" said Clare, still in her sweet gentle
voice, not at all as if she was angry, only expressing an obvious
truth. Molly felt very guilty and very unhappy. Clare went on, with a
shade of asperity in her tone: "You see, I don't know what to do with
you here if you don't eat enough to enable you to walk home. And I've
been out for these three hours trapesing about the grounds till I'm
as tired as can be, and missed my lunch and all." Then, as if a new
idea had struck her, she said,--"You lie back in that seat for a few
minutes, and try to eat the bunch of grapes, and I'll wait for you,
and just be eating a mouthful meanwhile. You are sure you don't want
this chicken?"

Molly did as she was bid, and leant back, picking languidly at the
grapes, and watching the good appetite with which the lady ate up the
chicken and jelly, and drank the glass of wine. She was so pretty and
so graceful in her deep mourning, that even her hurry in eating, as
if she was afraid of some one coming to surprise her in the act, did
not keep her little observer from admiring her in all she did.

"And now, darling, are you ready to go?" said she, when she had eaten
up everything on the tray. "Oh, come; you have nearly finished your
grapes; that's a good girl. Now, if you will come with me to the
side entrance, I will take you up to my own room, and you shall lie
down on the bed for an hour or two; and if you have a good nap your
headache will be quite gone."

So they set off, Clare carrying the empty tray, rather to Molly's
shame; but the child had enough work to drag herself along, and was
afraid of offering to do anything more. The "side entrance" was
a flight of steps leading up from a private flower-garden into a
private matted hall, or ante-room, out of which many doors opened,
and in which were deposited the light garden-tools and the bows and
arrows of the young ladies of the house. Lady Cuxhaven must have seen
their approach, for she met them in this hall as soon as they came
in.

"How is she now?" she asked; then glancing at the plates and glasses,
she added, "Come, I think there can't be much amiss! You're a good
old Clare, but you should have let one of the men fetch that tray in;
life in such weather as this is trouble enough of itself."

Molly could not help wishing that her pretty companion would have
told Lady Cuxhaven that she herself had helped to finish up the
ample luncheon; but no such idea seemed to come into her mind. She
only said,--"Poor dear! she is not quite the thing yet; has got a
headache, she says. I am going to put her down on my bed, to see if
she can get a little sleep."

Molly saw Lady Cuxhaven say something in a half-laughing manner
to "Clare," as she passed her; and the child could not keep from
tormenting herself by fancying that the words spoken sounded
wonderfully like "Over-eaten herself, I suspect." However, she felt
too poorly to worry herself long; the little white bed in the cool
and pretty room had too many attractions for her aching head. The
muslin curtains flapped softly from time to time in the scented air
that came through the open windows. Clare covered her up with a light
shawl, and darkened the room. As she was going away Molly roused
herself to say, "Please, ma'am, don't let them go away without me.
Please ask somebody to waken me if I go to sleep. I am to go back
with Miss Brownings."

"Don't trouble yourself about it, dear; I'll take care," said Clare,
turning round at the door, and kissing her hand to little anxious
Molly. And then she went away, and thought no more about it.
The carriages came round at half-past four, hurried a little by
Lady Cumnor, who had suddenly become tired of the business of
entertaining, and annoyed at the repetition of indiscriminating
admiration.

"Why not have both carriages out, mamma, and get rid of them all at
once?" said Lady Cuxhaven. "This going by instalments is the most
tiresome thing that could be imagined." So at last there had been a
great hurry and an unmethodical way of packing off every one at once.
Miss Browning had gone in the chariot (or "chawyot," as Lady Cumnor
called it;--it rhymed to her daughter, Lady Hawyot--or Harriet,
as the name was spelt in the _Peerage_), and Miss Phoebe had been
speeded along with several other guests, away in a great roomy family
conveyance, of the kind which we should now call an "omnibus." Each
thought that Molly Gibson was with the other, and the truth was, that
she lay fast asleep on Mrs. Kirkpatrick's bed--Mrs. Kirkpatrick _nÄe_
Clare.

The housemaids came in to arrange the room. Their talking aroused
Molly, who sat up on the bed, and tried to push back the hair from
her hot forehead, and to remember where she was. She dropped down on
her feet by the side of the bed, to the astonishment of the women,
and said,--"Please, how soon are we going away?"

"Bless us and save us! who'd ha' thought of any one being in the bed?
Are you one of the Hollingford ladies, my dear? They are all gone
this hour or more!"

"Oh, dear, what shall I do? That lady they call Clare promised to
waken me in time. Papa will so wonder where I am, and I don't know
what Betty will say."

The child began to cry, and the housemaids looked at each other
in some dismay and much sympathy. Just then, they heard Mrs.
Kirkpatrick's step along the passages, approaching. She was singing
some little Italian air in a low musical voice, coming to her bedroom
to dress for dinner. One housemaid said to the other, with a knowing
look, "Best leave it to her;" and they passed on to their work in the
other rooms.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick opened the door, and stood aghast at the sight of
Molly.

"Why, I quite forgot you!" she said at length. "Nay, don't cry;
you'll make yourself not fit to be seen. Of course I must take the
consequences of your over-sleeping yourself, and if I can't manage to
get you back to Hollingford to-night, you shall sleep with me, and
we'll do our best to send you home to-morrow morning."

"But papa!" sobbed out Molly. "He always wants me to make tea for
him; and I have no night-things."

"Well, don't go and make a piece of work about what can't be helped
now. I'll lend you night-things, and your papa must do without your
making tea for him to-night. And another time don't over-sleep
yourself in a strange house; you may not always find yourself among
such hospitable people as they are here. Why now, if you don't cry
and make a figure of yourself, I'll ask if you may come in to dessert
with Master Smythe and the little ladies. You shall go into the
nursery, and have some tea with them; and then you must come back
here and brush your hair and make yourself tidy. I think it is a very
fine thing for you to be stopping in such a grand house as this; many
a little girl would like nothing better."

During this speech she was arranging her toilette for dinner--taking
off her black morning gown; putting on her dressing-gown; shaking her
long soft auburn hair over her shoulders, and glancing about the room
in search of various articles of her dress,--a running flow of easy
talk came babbling out all the time.

"I have a little girl of my own, dear! I don't know what she would
not give to be staying here at Lord Cumnor's with me; but, instead
of that, she has to spend her holidays at school; and yet you are
looking as miserable as can be at the thought of stopping for
just one night. I really have been as busy as can be with those
tiresome--those good ladies, I mean, from Hollingford--and one can't
think of everything at a time."

Molly--only child as she was--had stopped her tears at the mention
of that little girl of Mrs. Kirkpatrick's, and now she ventured to
say,--

"Are you married, ma'am; I thought she called you Clare?"

In high good-humour Mrs. Kirkpatrick made reply:--"I don't look as
if I was married, do I? Every one is surprised. And yet I have been
a widow for seven months now: and not a grey hair on my head, though
Lady Cuxhaven, who is younger than I, has ever so many."

"Why do they call you 'Clare?'" continued Molly, finding her so
affable and communicative.

"Because I lived with them when I was Miss Clare. It is a pretty
name, isn't it? I married a Mr. Kirkpatrick; he was only a curate,
poor fellow; but he was of a very good family, and if three of his
relations had died without children I should have been a baronet's
wife. But Providence did not see fit to permit it; and we must always
resign ourselves to what is decreed. Two of his cousins married, and
had large families; and poor dear Kirkpatrick died, leaving me a
widow."

"You have a little girl?" asked Molly.

"Yes: darling Cynthia! I wish you could see her; she is my only
comfort now. If I have time I will show you her picture when we come
up to bed; but I must go now. It does not do to keep Lady Cumnor
waiting a moment, and she asked me to be down early, to help with
some of the people in the house. Now I shall ring this bell, and when
the housemaid comes, ask her to take you into the nursery, and to
tell Lady Cuxhaven's nurse who you are. And then you'll have tea with
the little ladies, and come in with them to dessert. There! I'm sorry
you've over-slept yourself, and are left here; but give me a kiss,
and don't cry--you really are rather a pretty child, though you've
not got Cynthia's colouring! Oh, Nanny, would you be so very kind as
to take this young lady--(what's your name, my dear? Gibson?),--Miss
Gibson, to Mrs. Dyson, in the nursery, and ask her to allow her to
drink tea with the young ladies there; and to send her in with them
to dessert. I'll explain it all to my lady."

Nanny's face brightened out of its gloom when she heard the name
Gibson; and, having ascertained from Molly that she was "the
doctor's" child, she showed more willingness to comply with Mrs.
Kirkpatrick's request than was usual with her.

Molly was an obliging girl, and fond of children; so, as long as she
was in the nursery, she got on pretty well, being obedient to the
wishes of the supreme power, and even very useful to Mrs. Dyson, by
playing at tricks, and thus keeping a little one quiet while its
brothers and sisters were being arrayed in gay attire,--lace and
muslin, and velvet, and brilliant broad ribbons.

"Now, miss," said Mrs. Dyson, when her own especial charge were all
ready, "what can I do for you? You have not got another frock here,
have you?" No, indeed, she had not; nor if she had had one, could it
have been of a smarter nature than her present thick white dimity.
So she could only wash her face and hands, and submit to the nurse's
brushing and perfuming her hair. She thought she would rather have
stayed in the park all night long, and slept under the beautiful
quiet cedar, than have to undergo the unknown ordeal of "going
down to dessert," which was evidently regarded both by children and
nurses as the event of the day. At length there was a summons from
a footman, and Mrs. Dyson, in a rustling silk gown, marshalled her
convoy, and set sail for the dining-room door.

There was a large party of gentlemen and ladies sitting round the
decked table, in the brilliantly lighted room. Each dainty little
child ran up to its mother, or aunt, or particular friend; but Molly
had no one to go to.

"Who is that tall girl in the thick white frock? Not one of the
children of the house, I think?"

The lady addressed put up her glass, gazed at Molly, and dropped it
in an instant. "A French girl, I should imagine. I know Lady Cuxhaven
was inquiring for one to bring up with her little girls, that they
might get a good accent early. Poor little woman, she looks wild
and strange!" And the speaker, who sate next to Lord Cumnor, made a
little sign to Molly to come to her; Molly crept up to her as to the
first shelter; but when the lady began talking to her in French, she
blushed violently, and said in a very low voice,--

"I don't understand French. I'm only Molly Gibson, ma'am."

"Molly Gibson!" said the lady, out loud; as if that was not much of
an explanation.

Lord Cumnor caught the words and the tone.

"Oh, ho!" said he. "Are you the little girl who has been sleeping in
my bed?"

He imitated the deep voice of the fabulous bear, who asks this
question of the little child in the story; but Molly had never read
the "Three Bears," and fancied that his anger was real; she trembled
a little, and drew nearer to the kind lady who had beckoned her as
to a refuge. Lord Cumnor was very fond of getting hold of what he
fancied was a joke, and working his idea threadbare; so all the time
the ladies were in the room he kept on his running fire at Molly,
alluding to the Sleeping Beauty, the Seven Sleepers, and any other
famous sleeper that came into his head. He had no idea of the misery
his jokes were to the sensitive girl, who already thought herself
a miserable sinner, for having slept on, when she ought to have
been awake. If Molly had been in the habit of putting two and two
together, she might have found an excuse for herself, by remembering
that Mrs. Kirkpatrick had promised faithfully to awaken her in time;
but all the girl thought of was, how little they wanted her in this
grand house; how she must seem like a careless intruder who had no
business there. Once or twice she wondered where her father was, and
whether he was missing her; but the thought of the familiar happiness
of home brought such a choking in her throat, that she felt she must
not give way to it, for fear of bursting out crying; and she had
instinct enough to feel that, as she was left at the Towers, the less
trouble she gave, the more she kept herself out of observation, the
better.

She followed the ladies out of the dining-room, almost hoping that
no one would see her. But that was impossible, and she immediately
became the subject of conversation between the awful Lady Cumnor and
her kind neighbour at dinner.

"Do you know, I thought this young lady was French when I first saw
her? she has got the black hair and eyelashes, and grey eyes, and
colourless complexion which one meets with in some parts of France,
and I know Lady Cuxhaven was trying to find a well-educated girl who
would be a pleasant companion to her children."

"No!" said Lady Cumnor, looking very stern, as Molly thought. "She
is the daughter of our medical man at Hollingford; she came with
the school visitors this morning, and she was overcome by the heat
and fell asleep in Clare's room, and somehow managed to over-sleep
herself, and did not waken up till all the carriages were gone. We
will send her home to-morrow morning, but for to-night she must stay
here, and Clare is kind enough to say she may sleep with her."

There was an implied blame running through this speech, that Molly
felt like needle-points all over her. Lady Cuxhaven came up at this
moment. Her tone was as deep, her manner of speaking as abrupt and
authoritative, as her mother's, but Molly felt the kinder nature
underneath.

"How are you now, my dear? You look better than you did under the
cedar-tree. So you're to stop here to-night? Clare, don't you think
we could find some of those books of engravings that would interest
Miss Gibson."

Mrs. Kirkpatrick came gliding up to the place where Molly stood; and
began petting her with pretty words and actions, while Lady Cuxhaven
turned over heavy volumes in search of one that might interest the
girl.

"Poor darling! I saw you come into the dining-room, looking so shy;
and I wanted you to come near me, but I could not make a sign to you,
because Lord Cuxhaven was speaking to me at the time, telling me
about his travels. Ah, here is a nice book--_Lodge's Portraits_; now
I'll sit by you and tell you who they all are, and all about them.
Don't trouble yourself any more, dear Lady Cuxhaven; I'll take charge
of her; pray leave her to me!"

Molly grew hotter and hotter as these last words met her ear. If
they would only leave her alone, and not labour at being kind to
her; would "not trouble themselves" about her! These words of Mrs.
Kirkpatrick's seemed to quench the gratitude she was feeling to Lady
Cuxhaven for looking for something to amuse her. But, of course, it
was a trouble, and she ought never to have been there.

By-and-by, Mrs. Kirkpatrick was called away to accompany Lady Agnes'
song; and then Molly really had a few minutes' enjoyment. She could
look round the room, unobserved, and, sure, never was any place out
of a king's house so grand and magnificent. Large mirrors, velvet
curtains, pictures in their gilded frames, a multitude of dazzling
lights decorated the vast saloon, and the floor was studded with
groups of ladies and gentlemen, all dressed in gorgeous attire.
Suddenly Molly bethought her of the children whom she had accompanied
into the dining-room, and to whose ranks she had appeared to
belong,--where were they? Gone to bed an hour before, at some quiet
signal from their mother. Molly wondered if she might go, too--if
she could ever find her way back to the haven of Mrs. Kirkpatrick's
bedroom. But she was at some distance from the door; a long way from
Mrs. Kirkpatrick, to whom she felt herself to belong more than to any
one else. Far, too, from Lady Cuxhaven, and the terrible Lady Cumnor,
and her jocose and good-natured lord. So Molly sate on, turning over
pictures which she did not see; her heart growing heavier and heavier
in the desolation of all this grandeur. Presently a footman entered
the room, and after a moment's looking about him, he went up to Mrs.
Kirkpatrick, where she sate at the piano, the centre of the musical
portion of the company, ready to accompany any singer, and smiling
pleasantly as she willingly acceded to all requests. She came now
towards Molly, in her corner, and said to her,--

"Do you know, darling, your papa has come for you, and brought your
pony for you to ride home; so I shall lose my little bedfellow, for
I suppose you must go?"

Go! was there a question of it in Molly's mind, as she stood up
quivering, sparkling, almost crying out loud. She was brought to her
senses, though, by Mrs. Kirkpatrick's next words.

"You must go and wish Lady Cumnor good-night, you know, my dear, and
thank her ladyship for her kindness to you. She is there, near that
statue, talking to Mr. Courtenay."

Yes! she was there--forty feet away--a hundred miles away! All that
blank space had to be crossed; and then a speech to be made!

"Must I go?" asked Molly, in the most pitiful and pleading voice
possible.

"Yes; make haste about it; there is nothing so formidable in it, is
there?" replied Mrs. Kirkpatrick, in a sharper voice than before,
aware that they were wanting her at the piano, and anxious to get the
business in hand done as soon as possible.

Molly stood still for a minute, then, looking up, she said, softly,--

"Would you mind coming with me, please?"

"No! not I!" said Mrs. Kirkpatrick, seeing that her compliance was
likely to be the most speedy way of getting through the affair; so
she took Molly's hand, and, on the way, in passing the group at the
piano, she said, smiling, in her pretty genteel manner,--

"Our little friend here is shy and modest, and wants me to accompany
her to Lady Cumnor to wish good-night; her father has come for her,
and she is going away."

Molly did not know how it was afterwards, but she pulled her hand out
of Mrs. Kirkpatrick's on hearing these words, and going a step or
two in advance came up to Lady Cumnor, grand in purple velvet, and
dropping a curtsey, almost after the fashion of the school-children,
she said,--

"My lady, papa is come, and I am going away; and, my lady, I wish
you good-night, and thank you for your kindness. Your ladyship's
kindness, I mean," she said, correcting herself as she remembered
Miss Browning's particular instructions as to the etiquette to be
observed to earls and countesses, and their honourable progeny, as
they were given that morning on the road to the Towers.

She got out of the saloon somehow; she believed afterwards, on
thinking about it, that she had never bidden good-by to Lady
Cuxhaven, or Mrs. Kirkpatrick, or "all the rest of them," as she
irreverently styled them in her thoughts.

Mr. Gibson was in the housekeeper's room, when Molly ran in, rather
to the stately Mrs. Brown's discomfiture. She threw her arms round
her father's neck. "Oh, papa, papa, papa! I am so glad you have
come;" and then she burst out crying, stroking his face almost
hysterically as if to make sure he was there.

"Why, what a noodle you are, Molly! Did you think I was going to give
up my little girl to live at the Towers all the rest of her life? You
make as much work about my coming for you, as if you thought I had.
Make haste, now, and get on your bonnet. Mrs. Brown, may I ask you
for a shawl, or a plaid, or a wrap of some kind to pin about her for
a petticoat?"

He did not mention that he had come home from a long round not half
an hour before, a round from which he had returned dinnerless and
hungry; but, on finding that Molly had not come back from the Towers,
he had ridden his tired horse round by Miss Brownings', and found
them in self-reproachful, helpless dismay. He would not wait to
listen to their tearful apologies; he galloped home, had a fresh
horse and Molly's pony saddled, and though Betty called after him
with a riding-skirt for the child, when he was not ten yards from his
own stable-door, he refused to turn back for it, but went off, as
Dick the stableman said, "muttering to himself awful."

Mrs. Brown had her bottle of wine out, and her plate of cake, before
Molly came back from her long expedition to Mrs. Kirkpatrick's room,
"pretty nigh on to a quarter of a mile off," as the housekeeper
informed the impatient father, as he waited for his child to come
down arrayed in her morning's finery with the gloss of newness worn
off. Mr. Gibson was a favourite in all the Towers' household, as
family doctors generally are; bringing hopes of relief at times
of anxiety and distress; and Mrs. Brown, who was subject to gout,
especially delighted in petting him whenever he would allow her. She
even went out into the stable-yard to pin Molly up in the shawl, as
she sate upon the rough-coated pony, and hazarded the somewhat safe
conjecture,--

"I daresay she'll be happier at home, Mr. Gibson," as they rode away.

Once out into the park Molly struck her pony, and urged him on as
hard as he would go. Mr. Gibson called out at last:

"Molly! we're coming to the rabbit-holes; it's not safe to go at such
a pace. Stop." And as she drew rein he rode up alongside of her.

"We're getting into the shadow of the trees, and it's not safe riding
fast here."

"Oh! papa, I never was so glad in all my life. I felt like a lighted
candle when they're putting the extinguisher on it."

"Did you? How d'ye know what the candle feels?"

"Oh, I don't know, but I did." And again, after a pause she
said,--"Oh, I am so glad to be here! It is so pleasant riding here in
the open, free, fresh air, crushing out such a good smell from the
dewy grass. Papa! are you there? I can't see you."

He rode close up alongside of her: he was not sure but what she might
be afraid of riding in the dark shadows, so he laid his hand upon
hers.

"Oh! I am so glad to feel you," squeezing his hand hard. "Papa, I
should like to get a chain like Ponto's, just as long as your longest
round, and then I could fasten us two to each end of it, and when I
wanted you I could pull, and if you didn't want to come, you could
pull back again; but I should know you knew I wanted you, and we
could never lose each other."

"I'm rather lost in that plan of yours; the details, as you state
them, are a little puzzling; but if I make them out rightly, I am to
go about the country, like the donkeys on the common, with a clog
fastened to my hind leg."

"I don't mind your calling me a clog, if only we were fastened
together."

"But I do mind you calling me a donkey," he replied.

"I never did. At least I didn't mean to. But it is such a comfort to
know that I may be as rude as I like."

"Is that what you've learnt from the grand company you've been
keeping to-day? I expected to find you so polite and ceremonious,
that I read a few chapters of _Sir Charles Grandison_, in order to
bring myself up to concert pitch."

"Oh, I do hope I shall never be a lord or a lady."

"Well, to comfort you, I'll tell you this: I'm sure you'll never be a
lord; and I think the chances are a thousand to one against your ever
being the other, in the sense in which you mean."

"I should lose myself every time I had to fetch my bonnet, or else
get tired of long passages and great staircases long before I could
go out walking."

"But you'd have your lady's-maid, you know."

"Do you know, papa, I think lady's-maids are worse than ladies. I
should not mind being a housekeeper so much."

"No! the jam-cupboards and dessert would lie very conveniently to
one's hand," replied her father, meditatively. "But Mrs. Brown tells
me that the thought of the dinners often keeps her from sleeping;
there's that anxiety to be taken into consideration. Still, in every
condition of life, there are heavy cares and responsibilities."

"Well! I suppose so," said Molly, gravely. "I know Betty says I wear
her life out with the green stains I get in my frocks from sitting in
the cherry-tree."

"And Miss Browning said she had fretted herself into a headache with
thinking how they had left you behind. I'm afraid you'll be as bad as
a bill of fare to them to-night. How did it all happen, goosey?"

"Oh, I went by myself to see the gardens; they are so beautiful! and
I lost myself, and sat down to rest under a great tree; and Lady
Cuxhaven and that Mrs. Kirkpatrick came; and Mrs. Kirkpatrick brought
me some lunch, and then put me to sleep on her bed,--and I thought
she would waken me in time, and she didn't; and so they'd all gone
away; and when they planned for me to stop till to-morrow, I didn't
like saying how very, very much I wanted to go home,--but I kept
thinking how you would wonder where I was."

"Then it was rather a dismal day of pleasure, goosey, eh?"

"Not in the morning. I shall never forget the morning in that garden.
But I was never so unhappy in all my life, as I have been all this
long afternoon."

Mr. Gibson thought it his duty to ride round by the Towers, and pay
a visit of apology and thanks to the family, before they left for
London. He found them all on the wing, and no one was sufficiently
at liberty to listen to his grateful civilities but Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
who, although she was to accompany Lady Cuxhaven, and pay a visit
to her former pupil, made leisure enough to receive Mr. Gibson, on
behalf of the family; and assured him of her faithful remembrance of
his great professional attention to her in former days in the most
winning manner.




CHAPTER III.

MOLLY GIBSON'S CHILDHOOD.


Sixteen years before this time, all Hollingford had been disturbed
to its foundations by the intelligence that Mr. Hall, the skilful
doctor, who had attended them all their days, was going to take
a partner. It was no use reasoning to them on the subject; so Mr.
Browning the vicar, Mr. Sheepshanks (Lord Cumnor's agent), and Mr.
Hall himself, the masculine reasoners of the little society, left
off the attempt, feeling that the _Che sarł sarł_ would prove more
silencing to the murmurs than many arguments. Mr. Hall had told his
faithful patients that, even with the strongest spectacles, his
sight was not to be depended upon; and they might have found out for
themselves that his hearing was very defective, although, on this
point, he obstinately adhered to his own opinion, and was frequently
heard to regret the carelessness of people's communication nowadays,
"like writing on blotting-paper, all the words running into each
other," he would say. And more than once Mr. Hall had had attacks
of a suspicious nature,--"rheumatism" he used to call them, but he
prescribed for himself as if they had been gout--which had prevented
his immediate attention to imperative summonses. But, blind and deaf,
and rheumatic as he might be, he was still Mr. Hall the doctor who
could heal all their ailments--unless they died meanwhile--and he had
no right to speak of growing old, and taking a partner.

He went very steadily to work all the same; advertising in medical
journals, reading testimonials, sifting character and qualifications;
and just when the elderly maiden ladies of Hollingford thought that
they had convinced their contemporary that he was as young as ever,
he startled them by bringing his new partner, Mr. Gibson, to call
upon them, and began "slyly," as these ladies said, to introduce him
into practice. And "who was this Mr. Gibson?" they asked, and echo
might answer the question, if she liked, for no one else did. No
one ever in all his life knew anything more of his antecedents than
the Hollingford people might have found out the first day they saw
him: that he was tall, grave, rather handsome than otherwise; thin
enough to be called "a very genteel figure," in those days, before
muscular Christianity had come into vogue; speaking with a slight
Scotch accent; and, as one good lady observed, "so very trite in
his conversation," by which she meant sarcastic. As to his birth,
parentage, and education,--the favourite conjecture of Hollingford
society was, that he was the illegitimate son of a Scotch duke, by
a Frenchwoman; and the grounds for this conjecture were these:--He
spoke with a Scotch accent; therefore, he must be Scotch. He had
a very genteel appearance, an elegant figure, and was apt--so his
ill-wishers said--to give himself airs; therefore, his father must
have been some person of quality; and, that granted, nothing was
easier than to run this supposition up all the notes of the scale of
the peerage,--baronet, baron, viscount, earl, marquis, duke. Higher
they dared not go, though one old lady, acquainted with English
history, hazarded the remark, that "she believed that one or two
of the Stuarts--hem--had not always been,--ahem--quite correct in
their--conduct; and she fancied such--ahem--things ran in families."
But, in popular opinion, Mr. Gibson's father always remained a duke;
nothing more.

Then his mother must have been a Frenchwoman, because his hair was
so black; and he was so sallow; and because he had been in Paris.
All this might be true, or might not; nobody ever knew, or found out
anything more about him than what Mr. Hall told them, namely, that
his professional qualifications were as high as his moral character,
and that both were far above the average, as Mr. Hall had taken pains
to ascertain before introducing him to his patients. The popularity
of this world is as transient as its glory, as Mr. Hall found out
before the first year of his partnership was over. He had plenty of
leisure left to him now to nurse his gout and cherish his eyesight.
The younger doctor had carried the day; nearly every one sent for
Mr. Gibson. Even at the great houses--even at the Towers, that
greatest of all, where Mr. Hall had introduced his new partner with
fear and trembling, with untold anxiety as to his behaviour, and
the impression he might make on my lord the Earl, and my lady the
Countess, Mr. Gibson was received at the end of a twelvemonth with as
much welcome respect for his professional skill as Mr. Hall himself
had ever been. Nay--and this was a little too much for even the kind
old doctor's good temper--Mr. Gibson had even been invited once to
dinner at the Towers, to dine with the great Sir Astley, the head of
the profession! To be sure, Mr. Hall had been asked as well; but he
was laid up just then with his gout (since he had had a partner the
rheumatism had been allowed to develope itself), and he had not been
able to go. Poor Mr. Hall never quite got over this mortification;
after it he allowed himself to become dim of sight and hard of
hearing, and kept pretty closely to the house during the two winters
that remained of his life. He sent for an orphan grand-niece to keep
him company in his old age; he, the woman-contemning old bachelor,
became thankful for the cheerful presence of the pretty, bonny Mary
Pearson, who was good and sensible, and nothing more. She formed
a close friendship with the daughters of the vicar, Mr. Browning,
and Mr. Gibson found time to become very intimate with all three.
Hollingford speculated much on which young lady would become Mrs.
Gibson, and was rather sorry when the talk about possibilities, and
the gossip about probabilities, with regard to the handsome young
surgeon's marriage, ended in the most natural manner in the world, by
his marrying his predecessor's niece. The two Miss Brownings showed
no signs of going into a consumption on the occasion, although
their looks and manners were carefully watched. On the contrary,
they were rather boisterously merry at the wedding, and poor Mrs.
Gibson it was that died of consumption, four or five years after her
marriage--three years after the death of her great-uncle, and when
her only child, Molly, was just three years old.

Mr. Gibson did not speak much about the grief at the loss of his
wife, which it was supposed that he felt. Indeed, he avoided all
demonstrations of sympathy, and got up hastily and left the room
when Miss Phoebe Browning first saw him after his loss, and burst
into an uncontrollable flood of tears, which threatened to end in
hysterics. Miss Browning declared she never could forgive him for his
hard-heartedness on that occasion; but a fortnight afterwards she
came to very high words with old Mrs. Goodenough, for gasping out her
doubts whether Mr. Gibson was a man of deep feeling; judging by the
narrowness of his crape hat-band, which ought to have covered his
hat, whereas there was at least three inches of beaver to be seen.
And, in spite of it all, Miss Browning and Miss Phoebe considered
themselves as Mr. Gibson's most intimate friends, in right of their
regard for his dead wife, and would fain have taken a quasi-motherly
interest in his little girl, had she not been guarded by a watchful
dragon in the shape of Betty, her nurse, who was jealous of any
interference between her and her charge; and especially resentful and
disagreeable towards all those ladies who, by suitable age, rank, or
propinquity, she thought capable of "casting sheep's eyes at master."

Several years before the opening of this story, Mr. Gibson's position
seemed settled for life, both socially and professionally. He was
a widower, and likely to remain so; his domestic affections were
centred on little Molly, but even to her, in their most private
moments, he did not give way to much expression of his feelings;
his most caressing appellation for her was "Goosey," and he took a
pleasure in bewildering her infant mind with his badinage. He had
rather a contempt for demonstrative people, arising from his medical
insight into the consequences to health of uncontrolled feeling. He
deceived himself into believing that still his reason was lord of
all, because he had never fallen into the habit of expression on any
other than purely intellectual subjects. Molly, however, had her own
intuitions to guide her. Though her papa laughed at her, quizzed her,
joked at her, in a way which the Miss Brownings called "really cruel"
to each other when they were quite alone, Molly took her little
griefs and pleasures, and poured them into her papa's ears, sooner
even than into Betty's, that kind-hearted termagant. The child grew
to understand her father well, and the two had the most delightful
intercourse together--half banter, half seriousness, but altogether
confidential friendship. Mr. Gibson kept three servants; Betty, a
cook, and a girl who was supposed to be housemaid, but who was under
both the elder two, and had a pretty life of it in consequence.
Three servants would not have been required if it had not been Mr.
Gibson's habit, as it had been Mr. Hall's before him, to take two
"pupils" as they were called in the genteel language of Hollingford,
"apprentices" as they were in fact--being bound by indentures, and
paying a handsome premium to learn their business. They lived in the
house, and occupied an uncomfortable, ambiguous, or, as Miss Browning
called it with some truth, "amphibious" position. They had their
meals with Mr. Gibson and Molly, and were felt to be terribly in the
way; Mr. Gibson not being a man who could make conversation, and
hating the duty of talking under restraint. Yet something within him
made him wince, as if his duties were not rightly performed, when,
as the cloth was drawn, the two awkward lads rose up with joyful
alacrity, gave him a nod, which was to be interpreted as a bow,
knocked against each other in their endeavours to get out of the
dining-room quickly; and then might be heard dashing along a passage
which led to the surgery, choking with half-suppressed laughter. Yet
the annoyance he felt at this dull sense of imperfectly fulfilled
duties only made his sarcasms on their inefficiency, or stupidity, or
ill manners, more bitter than before.

Beyond direct professional instruction, he did not know what to do
with the succession of pairs of young men, whose mission seemed to
be, to be plagued by their master consciously, and to plague him
unconsciously. Once or twice Mr. Gibson had declined taking a fresh
pupil, in the hopes of shaking himself free from the incubus, but his
reputation as a clever surgeon had spread so rapidly that his fees
which he had thought prohibitory, were willingly paid, in order that
the young man might make a start in life, with the prestige of having
been a pupil of Gibson of Hollingford. But as Molly grew to be a
little girl instead of a child, when she was about eight years old,
her father perceived the awkwardness of her having her breakfasts
and dinners so often alone with the pupils, without his uncertain
presence. To do away with this evil, more than for the actual
instruction she could give, he engaged a respectable woman, the
daughter of a shopkeeper in the town, who had left a destitute
family, to come every morning before breakfast, and to stay with
Molly till he came home at night; or, if he was detained, until the
child's bed-time.

"Now, Miss Eyre," said he, summing up his instructions the day before
she entered upon her office, "remember this: you are to make good tea
for the young men, and see that they have their meals comfortably,
and--you are five-and-thirty, I think you said?--try and make them
talk,--rationally, I am afraid is beyond your or anybody's power; but
make them talk without stammering or giggling. Don't teach Molly too
much: she must sew, and read, and write, and do her sums; but I want
to keep her a child, and if I find more learning desirable for her,
I'll see about giving it to her myself. After all, I'm not sure that
reading or writing is necessary. Many a good woman gets married
with only a cross instead of her name; it's rather a diluting
of mother-wit, to my fancy; but, however, we must yield to the
prejudices of society, Miss Eyre, and so you may teach the child to
read."

Miss Eyre listened in silence, perplexed but determined to be
obedient to the directions of the doctor, whose kindness she and
her family had good cause to know. She made strong tea; she helped
the young men liberally in Mr. Gibson's absence, as well as in his
presence, and she found the way to unloosen their tongues, whenever
their master was away, by talking to them on trivial subjects in her
pleasant homely way. She taught Molly to read and write, but tried
honestly to keep her back in every other branch of education. It was
only by fighting and struggling hard, that bit by bit Molly persuaded
her father to let her have French and drawing lessons. He was always
afraid of her becoming too much educated, though he need not have
been alarmed; the masters who visited such small country towns as
Hollingford forty years ago, were no such great proficients in their
arts. Once a week she joined a dancing class in the assembly-room
at the principal inn in the town: the "George;" and, being daunted
by her father in every intellectual attempt, she read every book
that came in her way, almost with as much delight as if it had been
forbidden. For his station in life, Mr. Gibson had an unusually
good library; the medical portion of it was inaccessible to Molly,
being kept in the surgery, but every other book she had either read,
or tried to read. Her summer place of study was that seat in the
cherry-tree, where she got the green stains on her frock, that have
already been mentioned as likely to wear Betty's life out. In spite
of this "hidden worm i' th' bud," Betty was to all appearance strong,
alert, and flourishing. She was the one crook in Miss Eyre's lot,
who was otherwise so happy in having met with a suitable well-paid
employment just when she needed it most. But Betty, though agreeing
in theory with her master when he told her of the necessity of having
a governess for his little daughter, was vehemently opposed to any
division of her authority and influence over the child who had been
her charge, her plague, and her delight ever since Mrs. Gibson's
death. She took up her position as censor of all Miss Eyre's sayings
and doings from the very first, and did not for a moment condescend
to conceal her disapprobation. In her heart she could not help
respecting the patience and painstaking of the good lady,--for
a "lady" Miss Eyre was in the best sense of the word, though in
Hollingford she only took rank as a shopkeeper's daughter. Yet Betty
buzzed about her with the teasing pertinacity of a gnat, always ready
to find fault, if not to bite. Miss Eyre's only defence came from the
quarter whence it might least have been expected--from her pupil; on
whose fancied behalf, as an oppressed little personage, Betty always
based her attacks. But very early in the day Molly perceived their
injustice, and soon afterwards she began to respect Miss Eyre for her
silent endurance of what evidently gave her far more pain than Betty
imagined. Mr. Gibson had been a friend in need to her family, so Miss
Eyre restrained her complaints, sooner than annoy him. And she had
her reward. Betty would offer Molly all sorts of small temptations to
neglect Miss Eyre's wishes; Molly steadily resisted, and plodded away
at her task of sewing or her difficult sum. Betty made cumbrous jokes
at Miss Eyre's expense; Molly looked up with the utmost gravity, as
if requesting the explanation of an unintelligible speech; and there
is nothing so quenching to a wag as to be asked to translate his
jest into plain matter-of-fact English, and to show wherein the
point lies. Occasionally Betty lost her temper entirely, and spoke
impertinently to Miss Eyre; but when this had been done in Molly's
presence, the girl flew out into such a violent passion of words
in defence of her silent trembling governess, that even Betty
herself was daunted, though she chose to take the child's anger as
a good joke, and tried to persuade Miss Eyre herself to join in her
amusement.

"Bless the child! one 'ud think I was a hungry pussy-cat, and she
a hen-sparrow, with her wings all fluttering, and her little eyes
aflame, and her beak ready to peck me just because I happened to
look near her nest. Nay, child! if thou lik'st to be stifled in a
nasty close room, learning things as is of no earthly good when they
is learnt, instead o' riding on Job Donkin's hay-cart, it's thy
look-out, not mine. She's a little vixen, isn't she?" smiling at
Miss Eyre, as she finished her speech. But the poor governess saw no
humour in the affair; the comparison of Molly to a hen-sparrow was
lost upon her. She was sensitive and conscientious, and knew, from
home experience, the evils of an ungovernable temper. So she began to
reprove Molly for giving way to her passion, and the child thought
it hard to be blamed for what she considered her just anger against
Betty. But, after all, these were the small grievances of a very
happy childhood.




CHAPTER IV.

MR. GIBSON'S NEIGHBOURS.


[Illustration (untitled)]

Molly grew up among these quiet people in calm monotony of life,
without any greater event than that which has been recorded--the
being left behind at the Towers--until she was nearly seventeen. She
had become a visitor at the school, but she had never gone again to
the annual festival at the great house; it was easy to find some
excuse for keeping away, and the recollection of that day was not
a pleasant one on the whole, though she often thought how much she
should like to see the gardens again.

Lady Agnes was married; there was only Lady Harriet remaining at
home; Lord Hollingford, the eldest son, had lost his wife, and was
a good deal more at the Towers since he had become a widower. He
was a tall ungainly man, considered to be as proud as his mother,
the countess; but, in fact, he was only shy, and slow at making
commonplace speeches. He did not know what to say to people whose
daily habits and interests were not the same as his; he would have
been very thankful for a handbook of small-talk, and would have
learnt off his sentences with good-humoured diligence. He often
envied the fluency of his garrulous father, who delighted in talking
to everybody, and was perfectly unconscious of the incoherence of his
conversation. But, owing to his constitutional reserve and shyness,
Lord Hollingford was not a popular man although his kindness of
heart was very great, his simplicity of character extreme, and his
scientific acquirements considerable enough to entitle him to much
reputation in the European republic of learned men. In this respect
Hollingford was proud of him. The inhabitants knew that the great,
grave, clumsy heir to its fealty was highly esteemed for his wisdom;
and that he had made one or two discoveries, though in what direction
they were not quite sure. But it was safe to point him out to
strangers visiting the little town, as "That's Lord Hollingford--the
famous Lord Hollingford, you know; you must have heard of him, he is
so scientific." If the strangers knew his name, they also knew his
claims to fame; if they did not, ten to one but they would make as
if they did, and so conceal not only their own ignorance, but that
of their companions, as to the exact nature of the sources of his
reputation.

He was left a widower with two or three boys. They were at a public
school; so that their companionship could make the house in which
he had passed his married life but little of a home to him, and he
consequently spent much of his time at the Towers; where his mother
was proud of him, and his father very fond, but ever so little afraid
of him. His friends were always welcomed by Lord and Lady Cumnor; the
former, indeed, was in the habit of welcoming everybody everywhere;
but it was a proof of Lady Cumnor's real affection for her
distinguished son, that she allowed him to ask what she called "all
sorts of people" to the Towers. "All sorts of people" meant really
those who were distinguished for science and learning, without regard
to rank: and it must be confessed, without much regard to polished
manners likewise.

Mr. Hall, Mr. Gibson's predecessor, had always been received with
friendly condescension by my lady, who had found him established as
the family medical man, when first she came to the Towers on her
marriage; but she never thought of interfering with his custom of
taking his meals, if he needed refreshment, in the housekeeper's
room, not _with_ the housekeeper, _bien entendu_. The comfortable,
clever, stout, and red-faced doctor would very much have preferred
this, even if he had had the choice given him (which he never had) of
taking his "snack," as he called it, with my lord and my lady, in the
grand dining-room. Of course, if some great surgical gun (like Sir
Astley) was brought down from London to bear on the family's health,
it was due to him, as well as to the local medical attendant, to ask
Mr. Hall to dinner, in a formal and ceremonious manner, on which
occasions Mr. Hall buried his chin in voluminous folds of white
muslin, put on his black knee-breeches, with bunches of ribbon at
the sides, his silk stockings and buckled shoes, and otherwise made
himself excessively uncomfortable in his attire, and went forth in
state in a post-chaise from the "George," consoling himself in the
private corner of his heart for the discomfort he was enduring with
the idea of how well it would sound the next day in the ears of the
squires whom he was in the habit of attending: "Yesterday at dinner
the earl said," or "the countess remarked," or "I was surprised to
hear when I was dining at the Towers yesterday." But somehow things
had changed since Mr. Gibson had become "the doctor" _par excellence_
at Hollingford. Miss Brownings thought that it was because he had
such an elegant figure, and "such a distinguished manner;" Mrs.
Goodenough, "because of his aristocratic connections"--"the son of a
Scotch duke, my dear, never mind on which side of the blanket." But
the fact was certain; although he might frequently ask Mrs. Brown
to give him something to eat in the housekeeper's room--he had no
time for all the fuss and ceremony of luncheon with my lady--he was
always welcome to the grandest circle of visitors in the house. He
might lunch with a duke any day that he chose; given that a duke was
forthcoming at the Towers. His accent was Scotch, not provincial. He
had not an ounce of superfluous flesh on his bones; and leanness goes
a great way to gentility. His complexion was sallow, and his hair
black; in those days, the decade after the conclusion of the great
continental war, to be sallow and black-a-vised was of itself a
distinction; he was not jovial (as my lord remarked with a sigh, but
it was my lady who endorsed the invitations), sparing of his words,
intelligent, and slightly sarcastic. Therefore he was perfectly
presentable.

His Scotch blood (for that he was of Scottish descent there could be
no manner of doubt) gave him just the kind of thistly dignity which
made every one feel that they must treat him with respect; so on that
head he was assured. The grandeur of being an invited guest to dinner
at the Towers from time to time, gave him but little pleasure for
many years, but it was a form to be gone through in the way of his
profession, without any idea of social gratification.

But when Lord Hollingford returned to make the Towers his home,
affairs were altered. Mr. Gibson really heard and learnt things that
interested him seriously, and that gave fresh flavour to his reading.
From time to time he met the leaders of the scientific world;
odd-looking, simple-hearted men, very much in earnest about their
own particular subjects, and not having much to say on any other. Mr.
Gibson found himself capable of appreciating such persons, and also
perceived that they valued his appreciation, as it was honestly
and intelligently given. Indeed, by-and-by, he began to send
contributions of his own to the more scientific of the medical
journals, and thus partly in receiving, partly in giving out
information and accurate thought, a new zest was added to his life.
There was not much intercourse between Lord Hollingford and himself;
the one was too silent and shy, the other too busy, to seek each
other's society with the perseverance required to do away with the
social distinction of rank that prevented their frequent meetings.
But each was thoroughly pleased to come into contact with the other.
Each could rely on the other's respect and sympathy with a security
unknown to many who call themselves friends; and this was a source
of happiness to both; to Mr. Gibson the most so, of course; for
his range of intelligent and cultivated society was the smaller.
Indeed, there was no one equal to himself among the men with whom he
associated, and this he had felt as a depressing influence, although
he never recognized the cause of his depression. There was Mr.
Ashton, the vicar, who had succeeded Mr. Browning, a thoroughly good
and kind-hearted man, but one without an original thought in him;
whose habitual courtesy and indolent mind led him to agree to every
opinion, not palpably heterodox, and to utter platitudes in the most
gentlemanly manner. Mr. Gibson had once or twice amused himself, by
leading the vicar on in his agreeable admissions of arguments "as
perfectly convincing," and of statements as "curious but undoubted,"
till he had planted the poor clergyman in a bog of heretical
bewilderment. But then Mr. Ashton's pain and suffering at suddenly
finding out into what a theological predicament he had been brought,
his real self-reproach at his previous admissions, were so great
that Mr. Gibson lost all sense of fun, and hastened back to the
Thirty-nine Articles with all the good-will in life, as the only
means of soothing the vicar's conscience. On any other subject,
except that of orthodoxy, Mr. Gibson could lead him any lengths; but
then his ignorance on most of them prevented bland acquiescence from
arriving at any results which could startle him. He had some private
fortune, and was not married, and lived the life of an indolent and
refined bachelor; but though he himself was no very active visitor
among his poorer parishioners, he was always willing to relieve their
wants in the most liberal, and, considering his habits, occasionally
in the most self-denying manner, whenever Mr. Gibson, or any one
else, made them clearly known to him. "Use my purse as freely as if
it was your own, Gibson," he was wont to say. "I'm such a bad one at
going about and making talk to poor folk--I daresay I don't do enough
in that way--but I am most willing to give you anything for any one
you may consider in want."

"Thank you; I come upon you pretty often, I believe, and make very
little scruple about it; but if you'll allow me to suggest, it is,
that you shouldn't try to make talk when you go into the cottages;
but just talk."

"I don't see the difference," said the vicar, a little querulously;
"but I daresay there is a difference, and I have no doubt what you
say is quite true. I shouldn't make talk, but talk; and as both are
equally difficult to me, you must let me purchase the privilege of
silence by this ten-pound note."

"Thank you. It's not so satisfactory to me; and, I should think, not
to yourself. But probably the Joneses and Greens will prefer it."

Mr. Ashton would look with plaintive inquiry into Mr. Gibson's face
after some such speech, as if asking if a sarcasm was intended. On
the whole, they went on in the most amicable way; only beyond the
gregarious feeling common to most men, they had very little actual
pleasure in each other's society. Perhaps the man of all others
to whom Mr. Gibson took the most kindly--at least, until Lord
Hollingford came into the neighbourhood--was a certain Squire Hamley.
He and his ancestors had been called squire as long back as local
tradition extended. But there was many a greater land-owner in the
county, for Squire Hamley's estate was not more than eight hundred
acres or so. But his family had been in possession of it long before
the Earls of Cumnor had been heard of; before the Hely-Harrisons
had bought Coldstone Park; no one in Hollingford knew the time when
the Hamleys had not lived at Hamley. "Ever since the Heptarchy,"
said the vicar. "Nay," said Miss Browning, "I have heard that there
were Hamleys of Hamley before the Romans." The vicar was preparing
a polite assent, when Mrs. Goodenough came in with a still more
startling assertion. "I have always heerd," said she, with all the
slow authority of an oldest inhabitant, "that there was Hamleys of
Hamley afore the time of the pagans." Mr. Ashton could only bow, and
say, "Possibly, very possibly, madam." But he said it in so courteous
a manner that Mrs. Goodenough looked round in a gratified way, as
much as to say, "The Church confirms my words; who now will dare
dispute them?" At any rate, the Hamleys were a very old family, if
not aborigines. They had not increased their estate for centuries;
they had held their own, if even with an effort, and had not sold
a rood of it for the last hundred years or so. But they were not
an adventurous race. They never traded, or speculated, or tried
agricultural improvements of any kind. They had no capital in any
bank; nor what perhaps would have been more in character, hoards of
gold in any stocking. Their mode of life was simple, and more like
that of yeomen than squires. Indeed Squire Hamley, by continuing the
primitive manners and customs of his forefathers, the squires of the
eighteenth century, did live more as a yeoman, when such a class
existed, than as a squire of this generation. There was a dignity in
this quiet conservatism that gained him an immense amount of respect
both from high and low; and he might have visited at every house
in the county had he so chosen. But he was very indifferent to the
charms of society; and perhaps this was owing to the fact that the
squire, Roger Hamley, who at present lived and reigned at Hamley,
had not received so good an education as he ought to have done.
His father, Squire Stephen, had been plucked at Oxford, and, with
stubborn pride, he had refused to go up again. Nay, more! he had
sworn a great oath, as men did in those days, that none of his
children to come should ever know either university by becoming a
member of it. He had only one child, the present Squire, and he was
brought up according to his father's word; he was sent to a petty
provincial school, where he saw much that he hated, and then turned
loose upon the estate as its heir. Such a bringing up did not do him
all the harm that might have been anticipated. He was imperfectly
educated, and ignorant on many points; but he was aware of his
deficiency, and regretted it in theory. He was awkward and ungainly
in society, and so kept out of it as much as possible; and he was
obstinate, violent-tempered, and dictatorial in his own immediate
circle. On the other side, he was generous, and true as steel; the
very soul of honour, in fact. He had so much natural shrewdness, that
his conversation was always worth listening to, although he was apt
to start by assuming entirely false premises, which he considered
as incontrovertible as if they had been mathematically proved; but,
given the correctness of his premises, nobody could bring more
natural wit and sense to bear upon the arguments based upon them.

He had married a delicate fine London lady; it was one of those
perplexing marriages of which one cannot understand the reasons. Yet
they were very happy, though possibly Mrs. Hamley would not have sunk
into the condition of a chronic invalid, if her husband had cared a
little more for her various tastes, or allowed her the companionship
of those who did. After his marriage he was wont to say he had got
all that was worth having out of the crowd of houses they called
London. It was a compliment to his wife which he repeated until the
year of her death; it charmed her at first, it pleased her up to the
last time of her hearing it; but, for all that, she used sometimes
to wish that he would recognize the fact that there might still be
something worth hearing and seeing in the great city. But he never
went there again, and though he did not prohibit her going, yet he
showed so little sympathy with her when she came back full of what
she had done on her visit that she ceased caring to go. Not but what
he was kind and willing in giving his consent, and in furnishing her
amply with money. "There, there, my little woman, take that! Dress
yourself up as fine as any on 'em, and buy what you like, for the
credit of Hamley of Hamley; and go to the park and the play, and show
off with the best on 'em. I shall be glad to see thee back again, I
know; but have thy fling while thou'rt about it." Then when she came
back it was, "Well, well, it has pleased thee, I suppose, so that's
all right. But the very talking about it tires me, I know, and I
can't think how you have stood it all. Come out and see how pretty
the flowers are looking in the south garden. I've made them sow all
the seeds you like; and I went over to Hollingford nursery to buy the
cuttings of the plants you admired last year. A breath of fresh air
will clear my brain after listening to all this talk about the whirl
of London, which is like to have turned me giddy."

Mrs. Hamley was a great reader, and had considerable literary taste.
She was gentle and sentimental; tender and good. She gave up her
visits to London; she gave up her sociable pleasure in the company
of her fellows in education and position. Her husband, owing to the
deficiencies of his early years, disliked associating with those
to whom he ought to have been an equal; he was too proud to mingle
with his inferiors. He loved his wife all the more dearly for her
sacrifices for him; but, deprived of all her strong interests, she
sank into ill-health; nothing definite; only she never was well.
Perhaps if she had had a daughter it would have been better for her:
but her two children were boys, and their father, anxious to give
them the advantages of which he himself had suffered the deprivation,
sent the lads very early to a preparatory school. They were to go
on to Rugby and Cambridge; the idea of Oxford was hereditarily
distasteful in the Hamley family. Osborne, the eldest--so called
after his mother's maiden name--was full of taste, and had some
talent. His appearance had all the grace and refinement of his
mother's. He was sweet-tempered and affectionate, almost as
demonstrative as a girl. He did well at school, carrying away many
prizes; and was, in a word, the pride and delight of both father and
mother; the confidential friend of the latter, in default of any
other. Roger was two years younger than Osborne; clumsy and heavily
built, like his father; his face was square, and the expression
grave, and rather immobile. He was good, but dull, his schoolmasters
said. He won no prizes, but brought home a favourable report of his
conduct. When he caressed his mother, she used laughingly to allude
to the fable of the lap-dog and the donkey; so thereafter he left
off all personal demonstration of affection. It was a great question
as to whether he was to follow his brother to college after he
left Rugby. Mrs. Hamley thought it would be rather a throwing
away of money, as he was so little likely to distinguish himself
in intellectual pursuits; anything practical--such as a civil
engineer--would be more the kind of life for him. She thought that
it would be too mortifying for him to go to the same college and
university as his brother, who was sure to distinguish himself--and,
to be repeatedly plucked, to come away wooden-spoon at last. But his
father persevered doggedly, as was his wont, in his intention of
giving both his sons the same education; they should both have the
advantages of which he had been deprived. If Roger did not do well at
Cambridge it would be his own fault. If his father did not send him
thither, some day or other he might be regretting the omission, as
the Squire had done himself for many a year. So Roger followed his
brother Osborne to Trinity, and Mrs. Hamley was again left alone,
after the year of indecision as to Roger's destination, which had
been brought on by her urgency. She had not been able for many years
to walk beyond her garden; the greater part of her life was spent on
a sofa, wheeled to the window in summer, to the fireside in winter.
The room which she inhabited was large and pleasant; four tall
windows looked out upon a lawn dotted over with flower-beds, and
melting away into a small wood, in the centre of which there was a
pond, filled with water-lilies. About this unseen pond in the deep
shade Mrs. Hamley had written many a pretty four-versed poem since
she lay on her sofa, alternately reading and composing verse. She had
a small table by her side on which there were the newest works of
poetry and fiction; a pencil and blotting-book, with loose sheets
of blank paper; a vase of flowers always of her husband's gathering;
winter and summer, she had a sweet fresh nosegay every day. Her maid
brought her a draught of medicine every three hours, with a glass of
clear water and a biscuit; her husband came to her as often as his
love for the open air and his labours out-of-doors permitted; but
the event of her day, when her boys were absent, was Mr. Gibson's
frequent professional visits.

He knew there was real secret harm going on all this time that people
spoke of her as a merely fanciful invalid; and that one or two
accused him of humouring her fancies. But he only smiled at such
accusations. He felt that his visits were a real pleasure and
lightening of her growing and indescribable discomfort; he knew that
Squire Hamley would have been only too glad if he had come every day;
and he was conscious that by careful watching of her symptoms he
might mitigate her bodily pain. Besides all these reasons, he took
great pleasure in the Squire's society. Mr. Gibson enjoyed the
other's unreasonableness; his quaintness; his strong conservatism
in religion, politics, and morals. Mrs. Hamley tried sometimes to
apologize for, or to soften away, opinions which she fancied were
offensive to the doctor, or contradictions which she thought too
abrupt; but at such times her husband would lay his great hand almost
caressingly on Mr. Gibson's shoulder, and soothe his wife's anxiety,
by saying, "Let us alone, little woman. We understand each other,
don't we, doctor? Why, bless your life, he gives me better than he
gets many a time; only, you see, he sugars it over, and says a sharp
thing, and pretends it's all civility and humility; but I can tell
when he's giving me a pill."

One of Mrs. Hamley's often-expressed wishes had been, that Molly
might come and pay her a visit. Mr. Gibson always refused this
request of hers, though he could hardly have given his reasons for
these refusals. He did not want to lose the companionship of his
child, in fact; but he put it to himself in quite a different way.
He thought her lessons and her regular course of employment would be
interrupted. The life in Mrs. Hamley's heated and scented room would
not be good for the girl; Osborne and Roger Hamley would be at home,
and he did not wish Molly to be thrown too exclusively upon them for
young society; or they would not be at home, and it would be rather
dull and depressing for his girl to be all the day long with a
nervous invalid.

But at length the day came when Mr. Gibson rode over, and volunteered
a visit from Molly; an offer which Mrs. Hamley received with the
"open arms of her heart," as she expressed it; and of which the
duration was unspecified.

The cause for the change in Mr. Gibson's wishes just referred to
was as follows:--It has been mentioned that he took pupils, rather
against his inclination, it is true; but there they were, a Mr. Wynne
and Mr. Coxe, "the young gentlemen," as they were called in the
household; "Mr. Gibson's young gentlemen," as they were termed in the
town. Mr. Wynne was the elder, the more experienced one, who could
occasionally take his master's place, and who gained experience by
visiting the poor, and the "chronic cases." Mr. Gibson used to talk
over his practice with Mr. Wynne, and try and elicit his opinions in
the vain hope that, some day or another, Mr. Wynne might start an
original thought. The young man was cautious and slow; he would never
do any harm by his rashness, but at the same time he would always be
a little behind his day. Still Mr. Gibson remembered that he had had
far worse "young gentlemen" to deal with; and was content with, if
not thankful for, such an elder pupil as Mr. Wynne. Mr. Coxe was a
boy of nineteen or so, with brilliant red hair, and a tolerably red
face, of both of which he was very conscious and much ashamed. He was
the son of an Indian officer, an old acquaintance of Mr. Gibson's.
Major Coxe was at some unpronounceable station in the Punjaub, at the
present time; but the year before he had been in England, and had
repeatedly expressed his great satisfaction at having placed his only
child as a pupil to his old friend, and had in fact almost charged
Mr. Gibson with the guardianship as well as the instruction of his
boy, giving him many injunctions which he thought were special in
this case; but which Mr. Gibson with a touch of annoyance assured the
major were always attended to in every case, with every pupil. But
when the poor major ventured to beg that his boy might be considered
as one of the family, and that he might spend his evenings in the
drawing-room instead of the surgery, Mr. Gibson turned upon him with
a direct refusal.

"He must live like the others. I can't have the pestle and mortar
carried into the drawing-room, and the place smelling of aloes."

"Must my boy make pills himself, then?" asked the major, ruefully.

"To be sure. The youngest apprentice always does. It's not hard
work. He'll have the comfort of thinking he won't have to swallow
them himself. And he'll have the run of the pomfret cakes, and the
conserve of hips, and on Sundays he shall have a taste of tamarinds
to reward him for his weekly labour at pill-making."

Major Coxe was not quite sure whether Mr. Gibson was not laughing
at him in his sleeve; but things were so far arranged, and the real
advantages were so great, that he thought it was best to take no
notice, but even to submit to the indignity of pill-making. He was
consoled for all these rubs by Mr. Gibson's manner at last when the
supreme moment of final parting arrived. The doctor did not say much;
but there was something of real sympathy in his manner that spoke
straight to the father's heart, and an implied "you have trusted me
with your boy, and I have accepted the trust in full," in each of the
few last words.

Mr. Gibson knew his business and human nature too well to distinguish
young Coxe by any overt marks of favouritism; but he could not help
showing the lad occasionally that he regarded him with especial
interest as the son of a friend. Besides this claim upon his regard,
there was something about the young man himself that pleased Mr.
Gibson. He was rash and impulsive, apt to speak, hitting the nail on
the head sometimes with unconscious cleverness, at other times making
gross and startling blunders. Mr. Gibson used to tell him that his
motto would always be "kill or cure," and to this Mr. Coxe once made
answer that he thought it was the best motto a doctor could have; for
if he could not cure the patient, it was surely best to get him out
of his misery quietly, and at once. Mr. Wynne looked up in surprise,
and observed that he should be afraid that such putting out of misery
might be looked upon as homicide by some people. Mr. Gibson said
in a dry tone, that for his part he should not mind the imputation
of homicide, but that it would not do to make away with profitable
patients in so speedy a manner; and that he thought that as long as
they were willing and able to pay two-and-sixpence for the doctor's
visit, it was his duty to keep them alive; of course, when they
became paupers the case was different. Mr. Wynne pondered over this
speech; Mr. Coxe only laughed. At last Mr. Wynne said,--

"But you go every morning, sir, before breakfast to see old Nancy
Grant, and you've ordered her this medicine, sir, which is about the
most costly in Corbyn's bill?"

"Have you not found out how difficult it is for men to live up to
their precepts? You've a great deal to learn yet, Mr. Wynne!" said
Mr. Gibson, leaving the surgery as he spoke.

"I never can make the governor out," said Mr. Wynne, in a tone of
utter despair. "What are you laughing at, Coxey?"

"Oh! I'm thinking how blest you are in having parents who have
instilled moral principles into your youthful bosom. You'd go and be
poisoning all the paupers off, if you hadn't been told that murder
was a crime by your mother; you'd be thinking you were doing as you
were bid, and quote old Gibson's words when you came to be tried.
'Please, my lord judge, they were not able to pay for my visits, and
so I followed the rules of the profession as taught me by Mr. Gibson,
the great surgeon at Hollingford, and poisoned the paupers.'"

"I can't bear that scoffing way of his."

"And I like it. If it wasn't for the governor's fun, and the
tamarinds, and something else that I know of, I would run off to
India. I hate stifling rooms, and sick people, and the smell of
drugs, and the stink of pills on my hands;--faugh!"




CHAPTER V.

CALF-LOVE.


One day, for some reason or other, Mr. Gibson came home unexpectedly.
He was crossing the hall, having come in by the garden-door--the
garden communicated with the stable-yard, where he had left his
horse--when the kitchen door opened, and the girl who was underling
in the establishment, came quickly into the hall with a note in her
hand, and made as if she was taking it upstairs; but on seeing her
master she gave a little start, and turned back as if to hide herself
in the kitchen. If she had not made this movement, so conscious of
guilt, Mr. Gibson, who was anything but suspicious, would never have
taken any notice of her. As it was, he stepped quickly forwards,
opened the kitchen door, and called out "Bethia" so sharply that she
could not delay coming forwards.

"Give me that note," he said. She hesitated a little.

"It's for Miss Molly," she stammered out.

"Give it to me!" he repeated more quickly than before. She looked as
if she would cry; but still she kept the note tight held behind her
back.

"He said as I was to give it into her own hands; and I promised as I
would, faithful."

"Cook, go and find Miss Molly. Tell her to come here at once."

He fixed Bethia with his eyes. It was of no use trying to escape: she
might have thrown it into the fire, but she had not presence of mind
enough. She stood immovable, only her eyes looked any way rather than
encounter her master's steady gaze. "Molly, my dear!"

"Papa! I did not know you were at home," said innocent, wondering
Molly.

"Bethia, keep your word. Here is Miss Molly; give her the note."

"Indeed, miss, I couldn't help it!"

Molly took the note, but before she could open it, her father
said,--"That's all, my dear; you needn't read it. Give it to me. Tell
those who sent you, Bethia, that all letters for Miss Molly must pass
through my hands. Now be off with you, goosey, and go back to where
you came from."


[Illustration: A LOVE LETTER.]


"Papa, I shall make you tell me who my correspondent is."

"We'll see about that, by-and-by."

She went a little reluctantly, with ungratified curiosity, upstairs
to Miss Eyre, who was still her daily companion, if not her
governess. He turned into the empty dining-room, shut the door,
broke the seal of the note, and began to read it. It was a flaming
love-letter from Mr. Coxe; who professed himself unable to go on
seeing her day after day without speaking to her of the passion she
had inspired--an "eternal passion," he called it; on reading which
Mr. Gibson laughed a little. Would she not look kindly at him? would
she not think of him whose only thought was of her? and so on, with a
very proper admixture of violent compliments to her beauty. She was
fair, not pale; her eyes were loadstars, her dimples marks of Cupid's
finger, &c.

Mr. Gibson finished reading it; and began to think about it in his
own mind. "Who would have thought the lad had been so poetical? but,
to be sure, there's a 'Shakspeare' in the surgery library: I'll take
it away and put 'Johnson's Dictionary' instead. One comfort is the
conviction of her perfect innocence--ignorance, I should rather
say--for it's easy to see it's the first 'confession of his love,' as
he calls it. But it's an awful worry--to begin with lovers so early.
Why, she's only just seventeen,--not seventeen, indeed, till July;
not for six weeks yet. Sixteen and three-quarters! Why, she's quite
a baby. To be sure--poor Jeanie was not so old, and how I did love
her!" (Mrs. Gibson's name was Mary, so he must have been referring to
some one else.) Then his thoughts wandered back to other days, though
he still held the open note in his hand. By-and-by his eyes fell upon
it again, and his mind came back to bear upon the present time. "I'll
not be hard upon him. I'll give him a hint; he's quite sharp enough
to take it. Poor laddie! if I send him away, which would be the
wisest course, I do believe he's got no home to go to."

After a little more consideration in the same strain, Mr. Gibson went
and sat down at the writing-table and wrote the following formula:--

   _Master Coxe._

("That 'master' will touch him to the quick," said Mr. Gibson to
himself as he wrote the word.)


   Rx. Verecundiż i oz.
       Fidelitatis Domesticż i oz.
       Reticentiż gr. iij.
   M.  Capiat hanc dosim ter die in aquë purë.

   R. GIBSON, _Ch._


Mr. Gibson smiled a little sadly as he re-read his words. "Poor
Jeanie," he said aloud. And then he chose out an envelope, enclosed
the fervid love-letter, and the above prescription; sealed it with
his own sharply-cut seal-ring, R. G., in old English letters, and
then paused over the address.

"He'll not like _Master Coxe_ outside; no need to put him to
unnecessary shame." So the direction on the envelope was--

   _Edward Coxe, Esq._

Then Mr. Gibson applied himself to the professional business which
had brought him home so opportunely and unexpectedly, and afterwards
he went back through the garden to the stables; and just as he had
mounted his horse, he said to the stable-man,--"Oh! by the way,
here's a letter for Mr. Coxe. Don't send it through the women; take
it round yourself to the surgery-door, and do it at once."

The slight smile upon his face, as he rode out of the gates, died
away as soon as he found himself in the solitude of the lanes. He
slackened his speed, and began to think. It was very awkward, he
considered, to have a motherless girl growing up into womanhood in
the same house with two young men, even if she only met them at
meal-times; and all the intercourse they had with each other was
merely the utterance of such words as, "May I help you to potatoes?"
or, as Mr. Wynne would persevere in saying, "May I assist you to
potatoes?"--a form of speech which grated daily more and more upon
Mr. Gibson's ears. Yet Mr. Coxe, the offender in this affair which
had just occurred, had to remain for three years more as a pupil in
Mr. Gibson's family. He should be the very last of the race. Still
there were three years to be got over; and if this stupid passionate
calf-love of his lasted, what was to be done? Sooner or later Molly
would become aware of it. The contingencies of the affair were so
excessively disagreeable to contemplate, that Mr. Gibson determined
to dismiss the subject from his mind by a good strong effort. He
put his horse to a gallop, and found that the violent shaking over
the lanes--paved as they were with round stones, which had been
dislocated by the wear and tear of a hundred years--was the very best
thing for the spirits, if not for the bones. He made a long round
that afternoon, and came back to his home imagining that the worst
was over, and that Mr. Coxe would have taken the hint conveyed in
the prescription. All that would be needed was to find a safe place
for the unfortunate Bethia, who had displayed such a daring aptitude
for intrigue. But Mr. Gibson reckoned without his host. It was the
habit of the young men to come in to tea with the family in the
dining-room, to swallow two cups, munch their bread or toast, and
then disappear. This night Mr. Gibson watched their countenances
furtively from under his long eye-lashes, while he tried against his
wont to keep up a dÄgagÄ manner, and a brisk conversation on general
subjects. He saw that Mr. Wynne was on the point of breaking out
into laughter, and that red-haired, red-faced Mr. Coxe was redder
and fiercer than ever, while his whole aspect and ways betrayed
indignation and anger.

"He will have it, will he?" thought Mr. Gibson to himself; and he
girded up his loins for the battle. He did not follow Molly and Miss
Eyre into the drawing-room as he usually did. He remained where he
was, pretending to read the newspaper, while Bethia, her face swelled
up with crying, and with an aggrieved and offended aspect, removed
the tea-things. Not five minutes after the room was cleared, came
the expected tap at the door. "May I speak to you, sir?" said the
invisible Mr. Coxe, from outside.

"To be sure. Come in, Mr. Coxe. I was rather wanting to talk to you
about that bill of Corbyn's. Pray sit down."

"It is about nothing of that kind, sir, that I wanted--that I
wished--No, thank you--I would rather not sit down." He, accordingly,
stood in offended dignity. "It is about that letter, sir--that letter
with the insulting prescription, sir."

"Insulting prescription! I am surprised at such a word being applied
to any prescription of mine--though, to be sure, patients are
sometimes offended at being told the nature of their illnesses; and,
I daresay, they may take offence at the medicines which their cases
require."

"I did not ask you to prescribe for me."

"Oh, ho! Then you were the Master Coxe who sent the note through
Bethia! Let me tell you it has cost her her place, and was a very
silly letter into the bargain."

"It was not the conduct of a gentleman, sir, to intercept it, and to
open it, and to read words never addressed to you, sir."

"No!" said Mr. Gibson, with a slight twinkle in his eye and a curl on
his lips, not unnoticed by the indignant Mr. Coxe. "I believe I was
once considered tolerably good-looking, and I daresay I was as great
a coxcomb as any one at twenty; but I don't think that even then I
should quite have believed that all those pretty compliments were
addressed to myself."

"It was not the conduct of a gentleman, sir," repeated Mr. Coxe,
stammering over his words--he was going on to say something more,
when Mr. Gibson broke in,--

"And let me tell you, young man," replied Mr. Gibson, with a sudden
sternness in his voice, "that what you have done is only excusable
in consideration of your youth and extreme ignorance of what are
considered the laws of domestic honour. I receive you into my house
as a member of my family--you induce one of my servants--corrupting
her with a bribe, I have no doubt--"

"Indeed, sir! I never gave her a penny."

"Then you ought to have done. You should always pay those who do your
dirty work."

"Just now, sir, you called it corrupting with a bribe," muttered Mr.
Coxe.

Mr. Gibson took no notice of this speech, but went on--"Inducing one
of my servants to risk her place, without offering her the slightest
equivalent, by begging her to convey a letter clandestinely to my
daughter--a mere child."

"Miss Gibson, sir, is nearly seventeen! I heard you say so only the
other day," said Mr. Coxe, aged twenty. Again Mr. Gibson ignored the
remark.

"A letter which you were unwilling to have seen by her father, who
had tacitly trusted to your honour, by receiving you as an inmate of
his house. Your father's son--I know Major Coxe well--ought to have
come to me, and have said out openly, 'Mr. Gibson, I love--or I fancy
that I love--your daughter; I do not think it right to conceal this
from you, although unable to earn a penny; and with no prospect of an
unassisted livelihood, even for myself, for several years, I shall
not say a word about my feelings--or fancied feelings--to the very
young lady herself.' That is what your father's son ought to have
said; if, indeed, a couple of grains of reticent silence wouldn't
have been better still."

"And if I had said it, sir--perhaps I ought to have said it," said
Mr. Coxe, in a hurry of anxiety, "what would have been your answer?
Would you have sanctioned my passion, sir?"

"I would have said, most probably--I will not be certain of my exact
words in a suppositional case--that you were a young fool, but not
a dishonourable young fool, and I should have told you not to let
your thoughts run upon a calf-love until you had magnified it into
a passion. And I daresay, to make up for the mortification I should
have given you, I might have prescribed your joining the Hollingford
Cricket Club, and set you at liberty as often as I could on the
Saturday afternoons. As it is, I must write to your father's agent in
London, and ask him to remove you out of my household, repaying the
premium, of course, which will enable you to start afresh in some
other doctor's surgery."

"It will so grieve my father," said Mr. Coxe, startled into dismay,
if not repentance.

"I see no other course open. It will give Major Coxe some trouble
(I shall take care that he is at no extra expense), but what I think
will grieve him the most is the betrayal of confidence; for I trusted
you, Edward, like a son of my own!" There was something in Mr.
Gibson's voice when he spoke seriously, especially when he referred
to any feeling of his own--he who so rarely betrayed what was passing
in his heart--that was irresistible to most people: the change from
joking and sarcasm to tender gravity.

Mr. Coxe hung his head a little, and meditated.

"I do love Miss Gibson," said he, at length. "Who could help it?"

"Mr. Wynne, I hope!" said Mr. Gibson.

"His heart is pre-engaged," replied Mr. Coxe. "Mine was free as air
till I saw her."

"Would it tend to cure your--well! passion, we'll say--if she wore
blue spectacles at meal-times? I observe you dwell much on the beauty
of her eyes."

"You are ridiculing my feelings, Mr. Gibson. Do you forget that you
yourself were young once?"

"Poor Jeanie" rose before Mr. Gibson's eyes; and he felt a little
rebuked.

"Come, Mr. Coxe, let us see if we can't make a bargain," said he,
after a minute or so of silence. "You have done a really wrong thing,
and I hope you are convinced of it in your heart, or that you will
be when the heat of this discussion is over, and you come to think a
little about it. But I won't lose all respect for your father's son.
If you will give me your word that, as long as you remain a member of
my family--pupil, apprentice, what you will--you won't again try to
disclose your passion--you see I am careful to take your view of what
I should call a mere fancy--by word or writing, looks or acts, in any
manner whatever, to my daughter, or to talk about your feelings to
any one else, you shall remain here. If you cannot give me your word,
I must follow out the course I named, and write to your father's
agent."

Mr. Coxe stood irresolute.

"Mr. Wynne knows all I feel for Miss Gibson, sir. He and I have no
secrets from each other."

"Well, I suppose he must represent the reeds. You know the story of
King Midas's barber, who found out that his royal master had the ears
of an ass beneath his hyacinthine curls. So the barber, in default
of a Mr. Wynne, went to the reeds that grew on the shores of a
neighbouring lake, and whispered to them, 'King Midas has the ears of
an ass.' But he repeated it so often that the reeds learnt the words,
and kept on saying them all day long, till at last the secret was no
secret at all. If you keep on telling your tale to Mr. Wynne, are you
sure he won't repeat it in his turn?"

"If I pledge my word as a gentleman, sir, I pledge it for Mr. Wynne
as well."

"I suppose I must run the risk. But remember how soon a young girl's
name may be breathed upon, and sullied. Molly has no mother, and for
that very reason she ought to move among you all, as unharmed as Una
herself."

"Mr. Gibson, if you wish it, I'll swear it on the Bible," cried the
excitable young man.

"Nonsense. As if your word, if it's worth anything, wasn't enough!
We'll shake hands upon it, if you like."

Mr. Coxe came forward eagerly, and almost squeezed Mr. Gibson's ring
into his finger.

As he was leaving the room, he said, a little uneasily, "May I give
Bethia a crown-piece?"

"No, indeed! Leave Bethia to me. I hope you won't say another word to
her while she's here. I shall see that she gets a respectable place
when she goes away."

Then Mr. Gibson rang for his horse, and went out on the last visits
of the day. He used to reckon that he rode the world around in the
course of the year. There were not many surgeons in the county who
had so wide a range of practice as he; he went to lonely cottages on
the borders of great commons; to farm-houses at the end of narrow
country lanes that led to nowhere else, and were overshadowed by the
elms and beeches overhead. He attended all the gentry within a circle
of fifteen miles round Hollingford; and was the appointed doctor to
the still greater families who went up to London every February--as
the fashion then was--and returned to their acres in the early weeks
of July. He was, of necessity, a great deal from home, and on this
soft and pleasant summer evening he felt the absence as a great evil.
He was startled at discovering that his little one was growing fast
into a woman, and already the passive object of some of the strong
interests that affect a woman's life; and he--her mother as well as
her father--so much away that he could not guard her as he would
have wished. The end of his cogitations was that ride to Hamley the
next morning, when he proposed to allow his daughter to accept Mrs.
Hamley's last invitation--an invitation that had been declined at the
time.

"You may quote against me the proverb, 'He that will not when he
may, when he will he shall have nay.' And I shall have no reason to
complain," he had said.

But Mrs. Hamley was only too much charmed with the prospect of having
a young girl for a visitor; one whom it would not be a trouble to
entertain; who might be sent out to ramble in the gardens, or told
to read when the invalid was too much fatigued for conversation; and
yet one whose youth and freshness would bring a charm, like a waft
of sweet summer air, into her lonely shut-up life. Nothing could be
pleasanter, and so Molly's visit to Hamley was easily settled.

"I only wish Osborne and Roger had been at home," said Mrs. Hamley,
in her low soft voice. "She may find it dull, being with old people,
like the squire and me, from morning till night. When can she come?
the darling--I am beginning to love her already!"

Mr. Gibson was very glad in his heart that the young men of the house
were out of the way; he did not want his little Molly to be passing
from Scylla to Charybdis; and, as he afterwards scoffed at himself
for thinking, he had got an idea that all young men were wolves in
chase of his one ewe-lamb.

"She knows nothing of the pleasure in store for her," he replied;
"and I'm sure I don't know what feminine preparations she may think
necessary, or how long they may take. You'll remember she is a little
ignoramus, and has had no ... training in etiquette; our ways at
home are rather rough for a girl, I'm afraid. But I know I could not
send her into a kinder atmosphere than this."

When the Squire heard from his wife of Mr. Gibson's proposal, he was
as much pleased as she at the prospect of their youthful visitor;
for he was a man of a hearty hospitality, when his pride did not
interfere with its gratification; and he was delighted to think of
his sick wife's having such an agreeable companion in her hours of
loneliness. After a while he said,--"It's as well the lads are at
Cambridge; we might have been having a love-affair if they had been
at home."

"Well--and if we had?" asked his more romantic wife.

"It wouldn't have done," said the Squire, decidedly. "Osborne
will have had a first-rate education--as good as any man in the
county--he'll have this property, and he's a Hamley of Hamley; not a
family in the shire is as old as we are, or settled on their ground
so well. Osborne may marry where he likes. If Lord Hollingford had a
daughter, Osborne would have been as good a match as she could have
required. It would never do for him to fall in love with Gibson's
daughter--I shouldn't allow it. So it's as well he's out of the way."

"Well! perhaps Osborne had better look higher."

"Perhaps! I say he must." The Squire brought his hand down with a
thump on the table, near him, which made his wife's heart beat hard
for some minutes. "And as for Roger," he continued, unconscious of
the flutter he had put her into, "he'll have to make his own way,
and earn his own bread; and, I'm afraid, he's not getting on very
brilliantly at Cambridge. He mustn't think of falling in love for
these ten years."

"Unless he marries a fortune," said Mrs. Hamley, more by way of
concealing her palpitation than anything else; for she was unworldly
and romantic to a fault.

"No son of mine shall ever marry a wife who is richer than himself
with my good will," said the Squire again, with emphasis, but without
a thump.

"I don't say but what if Roger is gaining five hundred a year by
the time he's thirty, he shall not choose a wife with ten thousand
pounds down; but I do say, if a boy of mine, with only two hundred a
year--which is all Roger will have from us, and that not for a long
time--goes and marries a woman with fifty thousand to her portion,
I'll disown him--it would be just disgusting."

"Not if they loved each other, and their whole happiness depended
upon their marrying each other," put in Mrs. Hamley, mildly.

"Pooh! away with love! Nay, my dear, we loved each other so dearly
we should never have been happy with any one else; but that's a
different thing. People aren't like what they were when we were
young. All the love nowadays is just silly fancy, and sentimental
romance, as far as I can see."

Mr. Gibson thought that he had settled everything about Molly's going
to Hamley before he spoke to her about it, which he did not do, until
the morning of the day on which Mrs. Hamley expected her. Then he
said,--"By the way, Molly! you're to go to Hamley this afternoon;
Mrs. Hamley wants you to go to her for a week or two, and it suits me
capitally that you should accept her invitation just now."

"Go to Hamley! This afternoon! Papa, you've got some odd reason at
the back of your head--some mystery, or something. Please, tell me
what it is. Go to Hamley for a week or two! Why, I never was from
home before this without you in all my life."

"Perhaps not. I don't think you ever walked before you put your feet
to the ground. Everything must have a beginning."

"It has something to do with that letter that was directed to me, but
that you took out of my hands before I could even see the writing of
the direction." She fixed her grey eyes on her father's face, as if
she meant to pluck out his secret.

He only smiled and said,--"You're a witch, goosey!"

"Then it had! But if it was a note from Mrs. Hamley, why might I
not see it? I have been wondering if you had some plan in your head
ever since that day.--Thursday, wasn't it? You've gone about in a
kind of thoughtful, perplexed way, just like a conspirator. Tell me,
papa"--coming up to him, and putting on a beseeching manner--"why
mightn't I see that note? and why am I to go to Hamley all on a
sudden?"

"Don't you like to go? Would you rather not?" If she had said that
she did not want to go he would have been rather pleased than
otherwise, although it would have put him into a great perplexity;
but he was beginning to dread the parting from her even for so short
a time. However, she replied directly,--

"I don't know--I daresay I shall like it when I have thought a little
more about it. Just now I'm so startled by the suddenness of the
affair, I haven't considered whether I shall like it or not. I shan't
like going away from you, I know. Why am I to go, papa?"

"There are three old ladies sitting somewhere, and thinking about
you just at this very minute; one has a distaff in her hands, and is
spinning a thread; she has come to a knot in it, and is puzzled what
to do with it. Her sister has a great pair of scissors in her hands,
and wants--as she always does, when any difficulty arises in the
smoothness of the thread--to cut it off short; but the third, who has
the most head of the three, plans how to undo the knot; and she it is
who has decided that you are to go to Hamley. The others are quite
convinced by her arguments; so, as the Fates have decreed that this
visit is to be paid, there is nothing left for you and me but to
submit."

"That's all nonsense, papa, and you're only making me more curious to
find out this hidden reason."

Mr. Gibson changed his tone, and spoke gravely now. "There is a
reason, Molly, and one which I do not wish to give. When I tell you
this much, I expect you to be an honourable girl, and to try and not
even conjecture what the reason may be,--much less endeavour to put
little discoveries together till very likely you may find out what I
want to conceal."

"Papa, I won't even think about your reason again. But then I shall
have to plague you with another question. I've had no new gown this
year, and I've outgrown all my last summer frocks. I've only three
that I can wear at all. Betty was saying only yesterday that I ought
to have some more."

"That'll do that you have got on, won't it? It's a very pretty
colour."

"Yes; but, papa" (holding it out as if she was going to dance), "it's
made of woollen, and so hot and heavy; and every day it will be
getting warmer."

"I wish girls could dress like boys," said Mr. Gibson, with a little
impatience. "How is a man to know when his daughter wants clothes?
and how is he to rig her out when he finds it out, just when she
needs them most and hasn't got them?"

"Ah, that's the question!" said Molly, in some despair.

"Can't you go to Miss Rose's? Doesn't she keep ready-made frocks for
girls of your age?"

"Miss Rose! I never had anything from her in my life," replied Molly,
in some surprise; for Miss Rose was the great dressmaker and milliner
of the little town, and hitherto Betty had made the girl's frocks.

"Well, but it seems people consider you as a young woman now, and
so I suppose you must run up milliners' bills like the rest of your
kind. Not that you're to get anything anywhere that you can't pay for
down in ready money. Here's a ten-pound note; go to Miss Rose's, or
Miss anybody's, and get what you want at once. The Hamley carriage
is to come for you at two, and anything that isn't quite ready, can
easily be sent by their cart on Saturday, when some of their people
always come to market. Nay, don't thank me! I don't want to have the
money spent, and I don't want you to go and leave me: I shall miss
you, I know; it's only hard necessity that drives me to send you
a-visiting, and to throw away ten pounds on your clothes. There, go
away; you're a plague, and I mean to leave off loving you as fast as
I can."

"Papa!" holding up her finger as in warning, "you're getting
mysterious again; and though my honourableness is very strong, I
won't promise that it shall not yield to my curiosity if you go on
hinting at untold secrets."

"Go away and spend your ten pounds. What did I give it you for but to
keep you quiet?"

Miss Rose's ready-made resources and Molly's taste combined, did not
arrive at a very great success. She bought a lilac print, because
it would wash, and would be cool and pleasant for the mornings; and
this Betty could make at home before Saturday. And for high-days and
holidays--by which was understood afternoons and Sundays--Miss Rose
persuaded her to order a gay-coloured flimsy plaid silk, which she
assured her was quite the latest fashion in London, and which Molly
thought would please her father's Scotch blood. But when he saw the
scrap which she had brought home as a pattern, he cried out that the
plaid belonged to no clan in existence, and that Molly ought to have
known this by instinct. It was too late to change it, however, for
Miss Rose had promised to cut the dress out as soon as Molly left her
shop.

Mr. Gibson had hung about the town all the morning instead of going
away on his usual distant rides. He passed his daughter once or twice
in the street, but he did not cross over when he was on the opposite
side--only gave her a look or a nod, and went on his way, scolding
himself for his weakness in feeling so much pain at the thought of
her absence for a fortnight or so.

"And, after all," thought he, "I'm only where I was when she comes
back; at least, if that foolish fellow goes on with his imaginating
fancy. She'll have to come back some time, and if he chooses to
imagine himself constant, there's still the devil to pay." Presently
he began to hum the air out of the "Beggar's Opera"--

   I wonder any man alive
     Should ever rear a daughter.




CHAPTER VI.

A VISIT TO THE HAMLEYS.


Of course the news of Miss Gibson's approaching departure had spread
through the household before the one o'clock dinner-time came; and
Mr. Coxe's dismal countenance was a source of much inward irritation
to Mr. Gibson, who kept giving the youth sharp glances of savage
reproof for his melancholy face, and want of appetite; which he
trotted out, with a good deal of sad ostentation; all of which was
lost upon Molly, who was too full of her own personal concerns to
have any thought or observation to spare from them, excepting once or
twice when she thought of the many days that must pass over before
she should again sit down to dinner with her father.

When she named this to him after the meal was over, and they were
sitting together in the drawing-room, waiting for the sound of the
wheels of the Hamley carriage, he laughed, and said,--

"I'm coming over to-morrow to see Mrs. Hamley; and I daresay I shall
dine at their lunch; so you won't have to wait long before you've the
treat of seeing the wild beast feed."

Then they heard the approaching carriage.

"Oh, papa," said Molly, catching at his hand, "I do so wish I wasn't
going, now that the time is come."

"Nonsense; don't let us have any sentiment. Have you got your keys?
that's more to the purpose."

Yes; she had got her keys, and her purse; and her little box was
put up on the seat by the coachman; and her father handed her in;
the door was shut, and she drove away in solitary grandeur, looking
back and kissing her hand to her father, who stood at the gate, in
spite of his dislike of sentiment, as long as the carriage could
be seen. Then he turned into the surgery, and found Mr. Coxe had
had his watching too, and had, indeed, remained at the window
gazing, moonstruck, at the empty road, up which the young lady had
disappeared. Mr. Gibson startled him from his reverie by a sharp,
almost venomous, speech about some small neglect of duty a day or two
before. That night Mr. Gibson insisted on passing by the bedside of a
poor girl whose parents were worn-out by many wakeful anxious nights
succeeding to hard-working days.

Molly cried a little, but checked her tears as soon as she remembered
how annoyed her father would have been at the sight of them. It
was very pleasant driving quickly along in the luxurious carriage,
through the pretty green lanes, with dog-roses and honeysuckles so
plentiful and rathe in the hedges, that she once or twice was tempted
to ask the coachman to stop till she had gathered a nosegay. She
began to dread the end of her little journey of seven miles; the only
drawback to which was, that her silk was not a true clan-tartan, and
a little uncertainty as to Miss Rose's punctuality. At length they
came to a village; straggling cottages lined the road, an old church
stood on a kind of green, with the public-house close by it; there
was a great tree, with a bench all round the trunk, midway between
the church gates and the little inn. The wooden stocks were close to
the gates. Molly had long passed the limit of her rides, but she knew
this must be the village of Hamley, and that they must be very near
to the hall.

They swung in at the gates of the park in a few minutes, and drove up
through meadow-grass, ripening for hay,--it was no grand aristocratic
deer-park this--to the old red-brick hall; not three hundred yards
from the high-road. There had been no footman sent with the carriage,
but a respectable servant stood at the door, even before they drew
up, ready to receive the expected visitor, and take her into the
drawing-room where his mistress lay awaiting her.

Mrs. Hamley rose from her sofa to give Molly a gentle welcome; she
kept the girl's hand in hers after she had finished speaking, looking
into her face, as if studying it, and unconscious of the faint blush
she called up on the otherwise colourless cheeks.

"I think we shall be great friends," said she, at length. "I like
your face, and I am always guided by first impressions. Give me a
kiss, my dear."

It was far easier to be active than passive during this process of
"swearing eternal friendship," and Molly willingly kissed the sweet
pale face held up to her.

"I meant to have gone and fetched you myself; but the heat oppresses
me, and I did not feel up to the exertion. I hope you had a pleasant
drive?"

"Very," said Molly, with shy conciseness.

"And now I will take you to your room; I have had you put close to
me; I thought you would like it better, even though it was a smaller
room than the other."

She rose languidly, and wrapping her light shawl round her yet
elegant figure, led the way upstairs. Molly's bedroom opened
out of Mrs. Hamley's private sitting-room; on the other side of
which was her own bedroom. She showed Molly this easy means of
communication, and then, telling her visitor she would await her in
the sitting-room, she closed the door, and Molly was left at leisure
to make acquaintance with her surroundings.

First of all, she went to the window to see what was to be seen.
A flower-garden right below; a meadow of ripe grass just beyond,
changing colour in long sweeps, as the soft wind blew over it; great
old forest-trees a little on one side; and, beyond them again, to be
seen only by standing very close to the side of the window-sill, or
by putting her head out, if the window was open, the silver shimmer
of a mere, about a quarter of a mile off. On the opposite side to the
trees and the mere, the look-out was bounded by the old walls and
high-peaked roofs of the extensive farm-buildings. The deliciousness
of the early summer silence was only broken by the song of the birds,
and the nearer hum of bees. Listening to these sounds, which enhanced
the exquisite sense of stillness, and puzzling out objects obscured
by distance or shadow, Molly forgot herself, and was suddenly
startled into a sense of the present by a sound of voices in the
next room--some servant or other speaking to Mrs. Hamley. Molly
hurried to unpack her box, and arrange her few clothes in the
pretty old-fashioned chest of drawers, which was to serve her
as dressing-table as well. All the furniture in the room was as
old-fashioned and as well-preserved as it could be. The chintz
curtains were Indian calico of the last century--the colours almost
washed out, but the stuff itself exquisitely clean. There was a
little strip of bedside carpeting, but the wooden flooring, thus
liberally displayed, was of finely-grained oak, so firmly joined,
plank to plank, that no grain of dust could make its way into the
interstices. There were none of the luxuries of modern days; no
writing-table, or sofa, or pier-glass. In one corner of the walls was
a bracket, holding an Indian jar filled with pot-pourri; and that and
the climbing honeysuckle outside the open window scented the room
more exquisitely than any toilette perfumes. Molly laid out her white
gown (of last year's date and size) upon the bed, ready for the (to
her new) operation of dressing for dinner, and having arranged her
hair and dress, and taken out her company worsted-work, she opened
the door softly, and saw Mrs. Hamley lying on the sofa.

"Shall we stay up here, my dear? I think it is pleasanter than
down below; and then I shall not have to come upstairs again at
dressing-time."

"I shall like it very much," replied Molly.

"Ah! you've got your sewing, like a good girl," said Mrs. Hamley.
"Now, I don't sew much. I live alone a great deal. You see, both
my boys are at Cambridge, and the squire is out of doors all day
long--so I have almost forgotten how to sew. I read a great deal. Do
you like reading?"

"It depends upon the kind of book," said Molly. "I'm afraid I don't
like 'steady reading,' as papa calls it."

"But you like poetry!" said Mrs. Hamley, almost interrupting Molly.
"I was sure you did, from your face. Have you read this last poem of
Mrs. Hemans? Shall I read it aloud to you?"

So she began. Molly was not so much absorbed in listening but that
she could glance round the room. The character of the furniture was
much the same as in her own. Old-fashioned, of handsome material,
and faultlessly clean, the age and the foreign appearance of it gave
an aspect of comfort and picturesqueness to the whole apartment. On
the walls there hung some crayon sketches--portraits. She thought
she could make out that one of them was a likeness of Mrs. Hamley,
in her beautiful youth. And then she became interested in the poem,
and dropped her work, and listened in a manner that was after Mrs.
Hamley's own heart. When the reading of the poem was ended, Mrs.
Hamley replied to some of Molly's words of admiration, by saying:

"Ah! I think I must read you some of Osborne's poetry some day; under
seal of secrecy, remember; but I really fancy they are almost as good
as Mrs. Hemans'."

To be nearly as good as Mrs. Hemans' was saying as much to the young
ladies of that day, as saying that poetry is nearly as good as
Tennyson's would be in this. Molly looked up with eager interest.

"Mr. Osborne Hamley? Does your son write poetry?"

"Yes. I really think I may say he is a poet. He is a very brilliant,
clever young man, and he quite hopes to get a fellowship at Trinity.
He says he is sure to be high up among the wranglers, and that
he expects to get one of the Chancellor's medals. That is his
likeness--the one hanging against the wall behind you."

Molly turned round, and saw one of the crayon sketches--representing
two boys, in the most youthful kind of jackets and trousers, and
falling collars. The elder was sitting down, reading intently.
The younger was standing by him, and evidently trying to call the
attention of the reader off to some object out of doors--out of
the window of the very room in which they were sitting, as Molly
discovered when she began to recognize the articles of furniture
faintly indicated in the picture.

"I like their faces!" said Molly. "I suppose it is so long ago now,
that I may speak of their likenesses to you as if they were somebody
else; may not I?"

"Certainly," said Mrs. Hamley, as soon as she understood what Molly
meant. "Tell me just what you think of them, my dear; it will amuse
me to compare your impressions with what they really are."

"Oh! but I did not mean to guess at their characters. I could not do
it; and it would be impertinent, if I could. I can only speak about
their faces as I see them in the picture."

"Well! tell me what you think of them!"

"The eldest--the reading boy--is very beautiful; but I can't quite
make out his face yet, because his head is down, and I can't see the
eyes. That is the Mr. Osborne Hamley who writes poetry."

"Yes. He is not quite so handsome now; but he was a beautiful boy.
Roger was never to be compared with him."

"No; he is not handsome. And yet I like his face. I can see his eyes.
They are grave and solemn-looking; but all the rest of his face is
rather merry than otherwise. It looks too steady and sober, too good
a face, to go tempting his brother to leave his lesson."

"Ah! but it was not a lesson. I remember the painter, Mr. Green, once
saw Osborne reading some poetry, while Roger was trying to persuade
him to come out and have a ride in the hay-cart--that was the
'motive' of the picture, to speak artistically. Roger is not much of
a reader; at least, he doesn't care for poetry, and books of romance,
or sentiment. He is so fond of natural history; and that takes him,
like the squire, a great deal out of doors; and when he is in, he is
always reading scientific books that bear upon his pursuits. He is a
good, steady fellow, though, and gives us great satisfaction, but he
is not likely to have such a brilliant career as Osborne."

Molly tried to find out in the picture the characteristics of the
two boys, as they were now explained to her by their mother; and in
questions and answers about the various drawings hung round the room
the time passed away until the dressing-bell rang for the six o'clock
dinner.

Molly was rather dismayed by the offers of the maid whom Mrs. Hamley
had sent to assist her. "I am afraid they expect me to be very
smart," she kept thinking to herself. "If they do, they'll be
disappointed; that's all. But I wish my plaid silk gown had been
ready."

She looked at herself in the glass with some anxiety, for the first
time in her life. She saw a slight, lean figure, promising to be
tall; a complexion browner than cream-coloured, although in a year or
two it might have that tint; plentiful curly black hair, tied up in a
bunch behind with a rose-coloured ribbon; long, almond-shaped, soft
gray eyes, shaded both above and below by curling black eyelashes.

"I don't think I am pretty," thought Molly, as she turned away from
the glass; "and yet I'm not sure." She would have been sure, if,
instead of inspecting herself with such solemnity, she had smiled her
own sweet merry smile, and called out the gleam of her teeth, and the
charm of her dimples.

She found her way downstairs into the drawing-room in good time;
she could look about her, and learn how to feel at home in her
new quarters. The room was forty-feet long or so, fitted up with
yellow satin at some distant period; high spindle-legged chairs and
pembroke-tables abounded. The carpet was of the same date as the
curtains, and was thread-bare in many places; and in others was
covered with drugget. Stands of plants, great jars of flowers,
old Indian china and cabinets gave the room the pleasant aspect
it certainly had. And to add to it, there were five high, long
windows on one side of the room, all opening to the prettiest
bit of flower-garden in the grounds--or what was considered as
such--brilliant-coloured, geometrically-shaped beds, converging
to a sun-dial in the midst. The Squire came in abruptly, and in
his morning dress; he stood at the door, as if surprised at the
white-robed stranger in possession of his hearth. Then, suddenly
remembering himself, but not before Molly had begun to feel very hot,
he said--

"Why, God bless my soul, I'd quite forgotten you; you're Miss Gibson,
Gibson's daughter, aren't you? Come to pay us a visit? I'm sure I'm
very glad to see you, my dear."

By this time, they had met in the middle of the room, and he was
shaking Molly's hand with vehement friendliness, intended to make up
for his not knowing her at first.

"I must go and dress, though," said he, looking at his soiled
gaiters. "Madam likes it. It's one of her fine London ways, and she's
broken me into it at last. Very good plan, though, and quite right
to make oneself fit for ladies' society. Does your father dress for
dinner, Miss Gibson?" He did not stay to wait for her answer, but
hastened away to perform his toilette.

They dined at a small table in a great large room. There were so few
articles of furniture in it, and the apartment itself was so vast,
that Molly longed for the snugness of the home dining-room; nay,
it is to be feared that, before the stately dinner at Hamley Hall
came to an end, she even regretted the crowded chairs and tables,
the hurry of eating, the quick unformal manner in which everybody
seemed to finish their meal as fast as possible, and to return to the
work they had left. She tried to think that at six o'clock all the
business of the day was ended, and that people might linger if they
chose. She measured the distance from the sideboard to the table with
her eye, and made allowances for the men who had to carry things
backwards and forwards; but, all the same, this dinner appeared to
her a wearisome business, prolonged because the Squire liked it, for
Mrs. Hamley seemed tired out. She ate even less than Molly, and sent
for fan and smelling-bottle to amuse herself with, until at length
the table-cloth was cleared away, and the dessert was put upon a
mahogany table, polished like a looking-glass.

The Squire had hitherto been too busy to talk, except about the
immediate concerns of the table, and one or two of the greatest
breaks to the usual monotony of his days; a monotony in which he
delighted, but which sometimes became oppressive to his wife. Now,
however, peeling his orange, he turned to Molly--

"To-morrow you'll have to do this for me, Miss Gibson."

"Shall I? I'll do it to-day, if you like, sir."

"No; to-day I shall treat you as a visitor, with all proper ceremony.
To-morrow I shall send you errands, and call you by your Christian
name."

"I shall like that," said Molly.

"I was wanting to call you something less formal than Miss Gibson,"
said Mrs. Hamley.

"My name is Molly. It is an old-fashioned name, and I was christened
Mary. But papa likes Molly."

"That's right. Keep to the good old fashions, my dear."

"Well, I must say I think Mary is prettier than Molly, and quite as
old a name, too," said Mrs. Hamley.

"I think it was," said Molly, lowering her voice, and dropping her
eyes, "because mamma was Mary, and I was called Molly while she
lived."

"Ah, poor thing," said the squire, not perceiving his wife's signs
to change the subject, "I remember how sorry every one was when she
died; no one thought she was delicate, she had such a fresh colour,
till all at once she popped off, as one may say."

"It must have been a terrible blow to your father," said Mrs. Hamley,
seeing that Molly did not know what to answer.

"Ay, ay. It came so sudden, so soon after they were married."

"I thought it was nearly four years," said Molly.

"And four years is soon--is a short time to a couple who look to
spending their lifetime together. Every one thought Gibson would have
married again."

"Hush," said Mrs. Hamley, seeing in Molly's eyes and change of colour
how completely this was a new idea to her. But the squire was not so
easily stopped.

"Well--I'd perhaps better not have said it, but it's the truth; they
did. He's not likely to marry now, so one may say it out. Why, your
father is past forty, isn't he?"

"Forty-three. I don't believe he ever thought of marrying again,"
said Molly, recurring to the idea, as one does to that of danger
which has passed by, without one's being aware of it.

"No! I don't believe he did, my dear. He looks to me just like a man
who would be constant to the memory of his wife. You must not mind
what the squire says."

"Ah! you'd better go away, if you're going to teach Miss Gibson such
treason as that against the master of the house."

Molly went into the drawing-room with Mrs. Hamley, but her thoughts
did not change with the room. She could not help dwelling on the
danger which she fancied she had escaped, and was astonished at
her own stupidity at never having imagined such a possibility as
her father's second marriage. She felt that she was answering Mrs.
Hamley's remarks in a very unsatisfactory manner.

"There is papa, with the Squire!" she suddenly exclaimed. There they
were coming across the flower-garden from the stable-yard, her father
switching his boots with his riding whip, in order to make them
presentable in Mrs. Hamley's drawing-room. He looked so exactly like
his usual self, his home-self, that the seeing him in the flesh was
the most efficacious way of dispelling the phantom fears of a second
wedding, which were beginning to harass his daughter's mind; and the
pleasant conviction that he could not rest till he had come over
to see how she was going on in her new home, stole into her heart,
although he spoke but little to her, and that little was all in a
joking tone. After he had gone away, the Squire undertook to teach
her cribbage, and she was happy enough now to give him all her
attention. He kept on prattling while they played; sometimes in
relation to the cards; at others telling her of small occurrences
which he thought might interest her.

"So you don't know my boys, even by sight. I should have thought you
would have done, for they're fond enough of riding into Hollingford;
and I know Roger has often enough been to borrow books from your
father. Roger is a scientific sort of a fellow. Osborne is clever,
like his mother. I shouldn't wonder if he published a book some day.
You're not counting right, Miss Gibson. Why, I could cheat you as
easily as possible." And so on, till the butler came in with a solemn
look, placed a large prayer-book before his master, who huddled the
cards away in a hurry, as if caught in an incongruous employment; and
then the maids and men trooped in to prayers--the windows were still
open, and the sounds of the solitary corncrake, and the owl hooting
in the trees, mingled with the words spoken. Then to bed; and so
ended the day.

Molly looked out of her chamber window--leaning on the sill, and
snuffing up the night odours of the honeysuckle. The soft velvet
darkness hid everything that was at any distance from her; although
she was as conscious of their presence as if she had seen them.

"I think I shall be very happy here," was in Molly's thoughts, as she
turned away at length, and began to prepare for bed. Before long the
Squire's words, relating to her father's second marriage, came across
her, and spoilt the sweet peace of her final thoughts. "Who could he
have married?" she asked herself. "Miss Eyre? Miss Browning? Miss
Phoebe? Miss Goodenough?" One by one, each of these was rejected
for sufficient reasons. Yet the unsatisfied question rankled in her
mind, and darted out of ambush to disturb her dreams.

Mrs. Hamley did not come down to breakfast; and Molly found out
with a little dismay, that the Squire and she were to have it by
themselves. On this first morning he put aside his newspapers--one
an old established Tory journal, with all the local and county
news, which was the most interesting to him; the other the _Morning
Chronicle_, which he called his dose of bitters, and which called out
many a strong expression and tolerably pungent oath. To-day, however,
he was "on his manners," as he afterwards explained to Molly; and he
plunged about, trying to find ground for a conversation. He could
talk of his wife and his sons, his estate, and his mode of farming;
his tenants, and the mismanagement of the last county election.
Molly's interests were her father, Miss Eyre, her garden and pony;
in a fainter degree Miss Brownings, the Cumnor Charity School, and
the new gown that was to come from Miss Rose's; into the midst of
which the one great question, "Who was it that people thought it was
possible papa might marry?" kept popping up into her mouth, like a
troublesome Jack-in-the-box. For the present, however, the lid was
snapped down upon the intruder as often as he showed his head between
her teeth. They were very polite to each other during the meal; and
it was not a little tiresome to both. When it was ended the Squire
withdrew into his study to read the untasted newspapers. It was
the custom to call the room in which Squire Hamley kept his coats,
boots, and gaiters, his different sticks and favourite spud, his
gun and fishing-rods, "the study." There was a bureau in it, and a
three-cornered arm-chair, but no books were visible. The greater part
of them were kept in a large, musty-smelling room, in an unfrequented
part of the house; so unfrequented that the housemaid often neglected
to open the window-shutters, which looked into a part of the grounds
over-grown with the luxuriant growth of shrubs. Indeed, it was a
tradition in the servants' hall that, in the late squire's time--he
who had been plucked at college--the library windows had been boarded
up to avoid paying the window-tax. And when the "young gentlemen"
were at home the housemaid, without a single direction to that
effect, was regular in her charge of this room; opened the windows
and lighted fires daily, and dusted the handsomely-bound volumes,
which were really a very fair collection of the standard literature
in the middle of the last century. All the books that had been
purchased since that time were held in small book-cases between
each two of the drawing-room windows, and in Mrs. Hamley's own
sitting-room upstairs. Those in the drawing-room were quite enough to
employ Molly; indeed, she was so deep in one of Sir Walter Scott's
novels that she jumped as if she had been shot, when an hour or so
after breakfast the Squire came to the gravel-path outside one of the
windows, and called to ask her if she would like to come out of doors
and go about the garden and home-fields with him.

"It must be a little dull for you, my girl, all by yourself, with
nothing but books to look at, in the mornings here; but you see,
madam has a fancy for being quiet in the mornings: she told your
father about it, and so did I, but I felt sorry for you all the same,
when I saw you sitting on the ground all alone in the drawing-room."

Molly had been in the very middle of the _Bride of Lammermoor_, and
would gladly have stayed in-doors to finish it, but she felt the
squire's kindness all the same. They went in and out of old-fashioned
greenhouses, over trim lawns, the Squire unlocked the great walled
kitchen-garden, and went about giving directions to gardeners; and
all the time Molly followed him like a little dog, her mind quite
full of "Ravenswood" and "Lucy Ashton." Presently, every place near
the house had been inspected and regulated, and the Squire was more
at liberty to give his attention to his companion, as they passed
through the little wood that separated the gardens from the adjoining
fields. Molly, too, plucked away her thoughts from the seventeenth
century; and, somehow or other, that one question, which had so
haunted her before, came out of her lips before she was aware--a
literal impromptu,--

"Who did people think papa would marry? That time--long ago--soon
after mamma died?"

She dropped her voice very soft and low, as she spoke the last words.
The Squire turned round upon her, and looked at her face, he knew not
why. It was very grave, a little pale, but her steady eyes almost
commanded some kind of answer.

"Whew," said he, whistling to gain time; not that he had anything
definite to say, for no one had ever had any reason to join Mr.
Gibson's name with any known lady: it was only a loose conjecture
that had been hazarded on the probabilities--a young widower, with a
little girl.

"I never heard of any one--his name was never coupled with any
lady's--'twas only in the nature of things that he should marry
again; he may do it yet, for aught I know, and I don't think it would
be a bad move either. I told him so, the last time but one he was
here."

"And what did he say?" asked breathless Molly.

"Oh: he only smiled and said nothing. You shouldn't take up words so
seriously, my dear. Very likely he may never think of marrying again,
and if he did, it would be a very good thing both for him and for
you!"

Molly muttered something, as if to herself, but the Squire might have
heard it if he had chosen. As it was, he wisely turned the current of
the conversation.

"Look at that!" he said, as they suddenly came upon the mere, or
large pond. There was a small island in the middle of the glassy
water, on which grew tall trees, dark Scotch firs in the centre,
silvery shimmering willows close to the water's edge. "We must get
you punted over there, some of these days. I'm not fond of using the
boat at this time of the year, because the young birds are still in
the nests among the reeds and water-plants; but we'll go. There are
coots and grebes."

"Oh, look, there's a swan!"

"Yes; there are two pair of them here. And in those trees there's
both a rookery and a heronry; the herons ought to be here by now, for
they're off to the sea in August, but I've not seen one yet. Stay!
isn't that one--that fellow on a stone, with his long neck bent down,
looking into the water?"

"Yes! I think so. I have never seen a heron, only pictures of them."

"They and the rooks are always at war, which doesn't do for such near
neighbours. If both herons leave the nest they are building, the
rooks come and tear it to pieces; and once Roger showed me a long
straggling fellow of a heron, with a flight of rooks after him, with
no friendly purpose in their minds, I'll be bound. Roger knows a deal
of natural history, and finds out queer things sometimes. He'd have
been off a dozen times during this walk of ours, if he'd been here:
his eyes are always wandering about, and see twenty things where I
only see one. Why! I've known him bolt into a copse because he saw
something fifteen yards off--some plant, maybe, which he'd tell me
was very rare, though I should say I'd seen its marrow at every turn
in the woods; and, if we came upon such a thing as this," touching
a delicate film of a cobweb upon a leaf with his stick, as he spoke,
"why, he could tell you what insect or spider made it, and if it
lived in rotten fir-wood, or in a cranny of good sound timber, or
deep down in the ground, or up in the sky, or anywhere. It's a pity
they don't take honours in Natural History at Cambridge. Roger would
be safe enough if they did."

"Mr. Osborne Hamley is very clever, is he not?" Molly asked, timidly.

"Oh, yes. Osborne's a bit of a genius. His mother looks for great
things from Osborne. I'm rather proud of him myself. He'll get a
Trinity fellowship, if they play him fair. As I was saying at the
magistrates' meeting yesterday, 'I've got a son who will make a noise
at Cambridge, or I'm very much mistaken.' Now, isn't it a queer quip
of Nature," continued the squire, turning his honest face towards
Molly, as if he was going to impart a new idea to her, "that I, a
Hamley of Hamley, straight in descent from nobody knows where--the
Heptarchy, they say--What's the date of the Heptarchy?"

"I don't know," said Molly, startled at being thus appealed to.

"Well! it was some time before King Alfred, because he was the
King of all England, you know; but, as I was saying, here am I, of
as good and as old a descent as any man in England, and I doubt
if a stranger, to look at me, would take me for a gentleman, with
my red face, great hands and feet, and thick figure, fourteen
stone, and never less than twelve even when I was a young man; and
there's Osborne, who takes after his mother, who couldn't tell her
great-grandfather from Adam, bless her; and Osborne has a girl's
delicate face, and a slight make, and hands and feet as small as a
lady's. He takes after madam's side, who, as I said, can't tell who
was her grandfather. Now, Roger is like me, a Hamley of Hamley, and
no one who sees him in the street will ever think that red-brown,
big-boned, clumsy chap is of gentle blood. Yet all those Cumnor
people, you make such ado of in Hollingford, are mere muck of
yesterday. I was talking to madam the other day about Osborne's
marrying a daughter of Lord Hollingford's--that's to say, if he had
a daughter--he's only got boys, as it happens; but I'm not sure if
I should consent to it. I really am not sure; for you see Osborne
will have had a first-rate education, and his family dates from the
Heptarchy, while I should be glad to know where the Cumnor folk were
in the time of Queen Anne?" He walked on, pondering the question of
whether he could have given his consent to this impossible marriage;
and after some time, and when Molly had quite forgotten the subject
to which he alluded, he broke out with--"No! I'm sure I should have
looked higher. So, perhaps, it's as well my Lord Hollingford has only
boys."

After a while, he thanked Molly for her companionship, with
old-fashioned courtesy; and told her that he thought, by this time,
madam would be up and dressed, and glad to have her young visitor
with her. He pointed out the deep purple house, with its stone
facings, as it was seen at some distance between the trees, and
watched her protectingly on her way along the field-paths.

"That's a nice girl of Gibson's," quoth he to himself. "But what a
tight hold the wench got of the notion of his marrying again! One had
need be on one's guard as to what one says before her. To think of
her never having thought of the chance of a stepmother. To be sure, a
stepmother to a girl is a different thing to a second wife to a man!"




CHAPTER VII.

FORESHADOWS OF LOVE PERILS.


[Illustration (untitled)]

If Squire Hamley had been unable to tell Molly who had ever been
thought of as her father's second wife, fate was all this time
preparing an answer of a pretty positive kind to her wondering
curiosity. But fate is a cunning hussy, and builds up her plans as
imperceptibly as a bird builds her nest; and with much the same kind
of unconsidered trifles. The first "trifle" of an event was the
disturbance which Jenny (Mr. Gibson's cook) chose to make at Bethia's
being dismissed. Bethia was a distant relation and protÄgÄe of
Jenny's, and she chose to say it was Mr. Coxe the tempter who ought
to have "been sent packing," not Bethia the tempted, the victim. In
this view there was quite enough plausibility to make Mr. Gibson
feel that he had been rather unjust. He had, however, taken care to
provide Bethia with another situation, to the full as good as that
which she held in his family. Jenny, nevertheless, chose to give
warning; and though Mr. Gibson knew full well from former experience
that her warnings were words, not deeds, he hated the discomfort, the
uncertainty,--the entire disagreeableness of meeting a woman at any
time in his house, who wore a grievance and an injury upon her face
as legibly as Jenny took care to do.

Down into the middle of this small domestic trouble came another, and
one of greater consequence. Miss Eyre had gone with her old mother,
and her orphan nephews and nieces, to the sea-side, during Molly's
absence, which was only intended at first to last for a fortnight.
After about ten days of this time had elapsed, Mr. Gibson received a
beautifully written, beautifully worded, admirably folded, and most
neatly sealed letter from Miss Eyre. Her eldest nephew had fallen ill
of scarlet fever, and there was every probability that the younger
children would be attacked by the same complaint. It was distressing
enough for poor Miss Eyre--this additional expense, this anxiety--the
long detention from home which the illness involved. But she said
not a word of any inconvenience to herself; she only apologized with
humble sincerity for her inability to return at the appointed time
to her charge in Mr. Gibson's family; meekly adding, that perhaps it
was as well, for Molly had never had the scarlet fever, and even if
Miss Eyre had been able to leave the orphan children to return to her
employments, it might not have been a safe or a prudent step.

"To be sure not," said Mr. Gibson, tearing the letter in two, and
throwing it into the hearth, where he soon saw it burnt to ashes. "I
wish I'd a five-pound house and not a woman within ten miles of me. I
might have some peace then." Apparently, he forgot Mr. Coxe's powers
of making mischief; but indeed he might have traced that evil back
to the unconscious Molly. The martyr-cook's entrance to take away
the breakfast things, which she announced by a heavy sigh, roused Mr.
Gibson from thought to action.

"Molly must stay a little longer at Hamley," he resolved. "They've
often asked for her, and now they'll have enough of her, I think. But
I can't have her back here just yet; and so the best I can do for her
is to leave her where she is. Mrs. Hamley seems very fond of her, and
the child is looking happy, and stronger in health. I'll ride round
by Hamley to-day at any rate, and see how the land lies."

He found Mrs. Hamley lying on a sofa placed under the shadow of the
great cedar-tree on the lawn. Molly was flitting about her, gardening
away under her directions; tying up the long sea-green stalks of
bright budded carnations, snipping off dead roses.

"Oh! here's papa!" she cried out, joyfully, as he rode up to the
white paling which separated the trim lawn and trimmer flower-garden
from the rough park-like ground in front of the house.

"Come in--come here--through the drawing-room window," said Mrs.
Hamley, raising herself on her elbow. "We've got a rose-tree to show
you that Molly has budded all by herself. We are both so proud of
it."

So Mr. Gibson rode round to the stables, left his horse there, and
made his way through the house to the open-air summer-parlour under
the cedar-tree, where there were chairs, table, books, and tangled
work. Somehow, he rather disliked asking for Molly to prolong her
visit; so he determined to swallow his bitter first, and then take
the pleasure of the delicious day, the sweet repose, the murmurous,
scented air. Molly stood by him, her hand on his shoulder. He sate
opposite to Mrs. Hamley.

"I've come here to-day to ask a favour," he began.

"Granted before you name it. Am not I a bold woman?"

He smiled and bowed, but went straight on with his speech.

"Miss Eyre, who has been Molly's governess, I suppose I must call
her--for many years, writes to-day to say that one of the little
nephews she took with her to Newport while Molly was staying here,
has caught the scarlet fever."

"I guess your request. I make it before you do. I beg for dear little
Molly to stay on here. Of course Miss Eyre can't come back to you;
and of course Molly must stay here!"

"Thank you; thank you very much. That was my request."

Molly's hand stole down to his, and nestled in that firm compact
grasp.

"Papa!--Mrs. Hamley!--I know you'll both understand me--but mayn't I
go home? I am very happy here; but--oh papa! I think I should like to
be at home with you best."

An uncomfortable suspicion flashed across his mind. He pulled her
round, and looked straight and piercingly into her innocent face. Her
colour came at his unwonted scrutiny, but her sweet eyes were filled
with wonder, rather than with any feeling which he dreaded to find.
For an instant he had doubted whether young red-headed Mr. Coxe's
love might not have called out a response in his daughter's breast;
but he was quite clear now.

"Molly, you're rude to begin with. I don't know how you're to make
your peace with Mrs. Hamley, I'm sure. And in the next place, do
you think you're wiser than I am; or that I don't want you at home,
if all other things were conformable? Stay where you are, and be
thankful."

Molly knew him well enough to be certain that the prolongation of her
visit at Hamley was quite a decided affair in his mind; and then she
was smitten with a sense of ingratitude. She left her father, and
went to Mrs. Hamley, and bent over her and kissed her; but she did
not speak. Mrs. Hamley took hold of her hand, and made room on the
sofa for her.

"I was going to have asked for a longer visit the next time you came,
Mr. Gibson. We are such happy friends, are not we, Molly? and now,
that this good little nephew of Miss Eyre's--"

"I wish he was whipped," said Mr. Gibson.

"--has given us such a capital reason, I shall keep Molly for a real
long visitation. You must come over and see us very often. There's a
room here for you always, you know; and I don't see why you should
not start on your rounds from Hamley every morning, just as well as
from Hollingford."

"Thank you. If you hadn't been so kind to my little girl, I might be
tempted to say something rude in answer to your last speech."

"Pray say it. You won't be easy till you have given it out, I know."

"Mrs. Hamley has found out from whom I get my rudeness," said Molly,
triumphantly. "It's an hereditary quality."

"I was going to say that proposal of yours that I should sleep at
Hamley was just like a woman's idea--all kindness, and no common
sense. How in the world would my patients find me out, seven miles
from my accustomed place? They'd be sure to send for some other
doctor, and I should be ruined in a month."

"Couldn't they send on here? A messenger costs very little."

"Fancy old Goody Henbury struggling up to my surgery, groaning at
every step, and then being told to just step on seven miles farther!
Or take the other end of society:--I don't think my Lady Cumnor's
smart groom would thank me for having to ride on to Hamley every time
his mistress wants me."

"Well, well, I submit. I am a woman. Molly, thou art a woman! Go and
order some strawberries and cream for this father of yours. Such
humble offices fall within the province of women. Strawberries and
cream are all kindness and no common sense, for they'll give him a
horrid fit of indigestion."

"Please speak for yourself, Mrs. Hamley," said Molly, merrily.
"I ate--oh, such a great basketful yesterday, and the squire went
himself to the dairy and brought out a great bowl of cream, when he
found me at my busy work. And I'm as well as ever I was, to-day, and
never had a touch of indigestion near me."

"She's a good girl," said her father, when she had danced out of
hearing. The words were not quite an inquiry, he was so certain of
his answer. There was a mixture of tenderness and trust in his eyes,
as he awaited the reply, which came in a moment.

"She's a darling. I cannot tell you how fond the Squire and I are of
her; both of us. I am so delighted to think she isn't to go away for
a long time. The first thing I thought of this morning when I wakened
up, was that she would soon have to return to you, unless I could
persuade you into leaving her with me a little longer. And now she
must stay--oh, two months at least."

It was quite true that the Squire had become very fond of Molly. The
charm of having a young girl dancing and singing inarticulate ditties
about the house and garden, was indescribable in its novelty to him.
And then Molly was so willing and so wise; ready both to talk and to
listen at the right times. Mrs. Hamley was quite right in speaking
of her husband's fondness for Molly. But either she herself chose a
wrong time for telling him of the prolongation of the girl's visit,
or one of the fits of temper to which he was liable, but which he
generally strove to check in the presence of his wife, was upon him;
at any rate, he received the news in anything but a gracious frame of
mind.

"Stay longer! Did Gibson ask for it?"

"Yes! I don't see what else is to become of her; Miss Eyre away and
all. It's a very awkward position for a motherless girl like her to
be at the head of a household with two young men in it."

"That's Gibson's look-out; he should have thought of it before taking
pupils, or apprentices, or whatever he calls them."

"My dear Squire! why, I thought you'd be as glad as I was--as I am to
keep Molly. I asked her to stay for an indefinite time; two months at
least."

"And to be in the house with Osborne! Roger, too, will be at home."

By the cloud in the Squire's eyes, Mrs. Hamley read his mind.

"Oh, she's not at all the sort of girl young men of their age would
take to. We like her because we see what she really is; but lads of
one or two and twenty want all the accessories of a young woman."

"Want what?" growled the Squire.

"Such things as becoming dress, style of manner. They would not at
their age even see that she is pretty; their ideas of beauty would
include colour."

"I suppose all that's very clever; but I don't understand it. All I
know is, that it's a very dangerous thing to shut two young men of
one and three and twenty up in a country-house like this with a girl
of seventeen--choose what her gowns may be like, or her hair, or her
eyes. And I told you particularly I didn't want Osborne, or either of
them, indeed, to be falling in love with her. I'm very much annoyed."

Mrs. Hamley's face fell; she became a little pale.

"Shall we make arrangements for their stopping away while she is
here; staying up at Cambridge, or reading with some one? going abroad
for a month or two?"

"No; you've been reckoning this ever so long on their coming home.
I've seen the marks of the weeks on your almanack. I'd sooner speak
to Gibson, and tell him he must take his daughter away, for it's not
convenient to us--"

"My dear Roger! I beg you will do no such thing. It will be so
unkind; it will give the lie to all I said yesterday. Don't, please,
do that. For my sake, don't speak to Mr. Gibson!"

"Well, well, don't put yourself in a flutter," for he was afraid of
her becoming hysterical; "I'll speak to Osborne when he comes home,
and tell him how much I should dislike anything of the kind."

"And Roger is always far too full of his natural history and
comparative anatomy, and messes of that sort, to be thinking of
falling in love with Venus herself. He has not the sentiment and
imagination of Osborne."

"Ah, you don't know; you never can be sure about a young man! But
with Roger it wouldn't so much signify. He would know he couldn't
marry for years to come."

All that afternoon the Squire tried to steer clear of Molly, to whom
he felt himself to have been an inhospitable traitor. But she was so
perfectly unconscious of his shyness of her, and so merry and sweet
in her behaviour as a welcome guest, never distrusting him for a
moment, however gruff he might be, that by the next morning she had
completely won him round, and they were quite on the old terms again.
At breakfast this very morning, a letter was passed from the Squire
to his wife, and back again, without a word as to its contents; but--

"Fortunate!"

"Yes! very!"

Little did Molly apply these expressions to the piece of news Mrs.
Hamley told her in the course of the day; namely, that her son
Osborne had received an invitation to stay with a friend in the
neighbourhood of Cambridge, and perhaps to make a tour on the
Continent with him subsequently; and that, consequently, he would not
accompany his brother when Roger came home.

Molly was very sympathetic.

"Oh, dear! I am so sorry!"

Mrs. Hamley was thankful her husband was not present, Molly spoke the
words so heartily.

"You have been thinking so long of his coming home. I am afraid it is
a great disappointment."

Mrs. Hamley smiled--relieved.

"Yes! it is a disappointment certainly, but we must think of
Osborne's pleasure. And with his poetical mind, he will write us such
delightful travelling letters. Poor fellow! he must be going into the
examination to-day! Both his father and I feel sure, though, that he
will be a high wrangler. Only--I should like to have seen him, my own
dear boy. But it is best as it is."

Molly was a little puzzled by this speech, but soon put it out of her
head. It was a disappointment to her, too, that she should not see
this beautiful, brilliant young man, his mother's hero. From time to
time her maiden fancy had dwelt upon what he would be like; how the
lovely boy of the picture in Mrs. Hamley's dressing-room would have
changed in the ten years that had elapsed since the likeness was
taken; if he would read poetry aloud; if he would even read his own
poetry. However, in the never-ending feminine business of the day,
she soon forgot her own disappointment; it only came back to her on
first wakening the next morning, as a vague something that was not
quite so pleasant as she had anticipated, and then was banished as a
subject of regret. Her days at Hamley were well filled up with the
small duties that would have belonged to a daughter of the house had
there been one. She made breakfast for the lonely squire, and would
willingly have carried up madam's, but that daily piece of work
belonged to the squire, and was jealously guarded by him. She read
the smaller print of the newspapers aloud to him, city articles,
money and corn markets included. She strolled about the gardens with
him, gathering fresh flowers, meanwhile, to deck the drawing-room
against Mrs. Hamley should come down. She was her companion when she
took her drives in the close carriage; they read poetry and mild
literature together in Mrs. Hamley's sitting-room upstairs. She was
quite clever at cribbage now, and could beat the squire if she took
pains. Besides these things, there were her own independent ways of
employing herself. She used to try to practise an hour daily on
the old grand piano in the solitary drawing-room, because she had
promised Miss Eyre she would do so. And she had found her way into
the library, and used to undo the heavy bars of the shutters if the
housemaid had forgotten this duty, and mount the ladder, sitting on
the steps, for an hour at a time, deep in some book of the old
English classics. The summer days were very short to this happy girl
of seventeen.




CHAPTER VIII.

DRIFTING INTO DANGER.


On Thursday, the quiet country household was stirred through all
its fibres with the thought of Roger's coming home. Mrs. Hamley had
not seemed quite so well, or quite in such good spirits for two or
three days before; and the squire himself had appeared to be put out
without any visible cause. They had not chosen to tell Molly that
Osborne's name had only appeared very low down in the mathematical
tripos. So all that their visitor knew was that something was out of
tune, and she hoped that Roger's coming home would set it to rights,
for it was beyond the power of her small cares and wiles.

On Thursday, the housemaid apologized to her for some slight
negligence in her bedroom, by saying she had been busy scouring
Mr. Roger's rooms. "Not but what they were as clean as could be
beforehand; but mistress would always have the young gentlemen's
rooms cleaned afresh before they came home. If it had been Mr.
Osborne, the whole house would have had to be done; but, to be sure,
he was the eldest son, so it was but likely." Molly was amused at
this testimony to the rights of heirship; but somehow she herself had
fallen into the family manner of thinking that nothing was too great
or too good for "the eldest son." In his father's eyes, Osborne was
the representative of the ancient house of Hamley of Hamley, the
future owner of the land which had been theirs for a thousand years.
His mother clung to him because they two were cast in the same
mould, both physically and mentally--because he bore her maiden name.
She had indoctrinated Molly with her faith, and, in spite of her
amusement at the housemaid's speech, the girl visitor would have
been as anxious as any one to show her feudal loyalty to the heir,
if indeed it had been he that was coming. After luncheon, Mrs. Hamley
went to rest, in preparation for Roger's return; and Molly also
retired to her own room, feeling that it would be better for her to
remain there until dinner-time, and so to leave the father and mother
to receive their boy in privacy. She took a book of MS. poems with
her; they were all of Osborne Hamley's composition; and his mother
had read some of them aloud to her young visitor more than once.
Molly had asked permission to copy one or two of those which were
her greatest favourites; and this quiet summer afternoon she took
this copying for her employment, sitting at the pleasant open window,
and losing herself in dreamy out-looks into the gardens and woods,
quivering in the noon-tide heat. The house was so still, in its
silence it might have been the "moated grange;" the booming buzz of
the blue flies, in the great staircase window, seemed the loudest
noise in-doors. And there was scarcely a sound out-of-doors but the
humming of bees, in the flower-beds below the window. Distant voices
from the far-away fields where they were making hay--the scent of
which came in sudden wafts distinct from that of the nearer roses
and honeysuckles--these merry piping voices just made Molly feel the
depth of the present silence. She had left off copying, her hand
weary with the unusual exertion of so much writing, and she was
lazily trying to learn one or two of the poems off by heart.

   I asked of the wind, but answer made it none,
   Save its accustomed sad and solitary moan--

she kept saying to herself, losing her sense of whatever meaning the
words had ever had, in the repetition which had become mechanical.
Suddenly there was the snap of a shutting gate; wheels crackling on
the dry gravel, horses' feet on the drive; a loud cheerful voice
in the house, coming up through the open windows, the hall, the
passages, the staircase, with unwonted fulness and roundness of tone.
The entrance-hall downstairs was paved with diamonds of black and
white marble; the low wide staircase that went in short flights
around the hall, till you could look down upon the marble floor from
the top story of the house, was uncarpeted--uncovered. The Squire
was too proud of his beautifully-joined oaken flooring to cover this
stair-case up unnecessarily; not to say a word of the usual state of
want of ready money to expend upon the decorations of his house. So,
through the undraperied hollow square of the hall and staircase every
sound ascended clear and distinct; and Molly heard the Squire's glad
"Hallo! here he is," and madam's softer, more plaintive voice; and
then the loud, full, strange tone, which she knew must be Roger's.
Then there was an opening and shutting of doors, and only a distant
buzz of talking. Molly began again--

   I asked of the wind, but answer made it none.

And this time she had nearly finished learning the poem, when she
heard Mrs. Hamley come hastily into her sitting-room that adjoined
Molly's bedroom, and burst out into an irrepressible half-hysterical
fit of sobbing. Molly was too young to have any complication of
motives which should prevent her going at once to try and give what
comfort she could. In an instant she was kneeling at Mrs. Hamley's
feet, holding the poor lady's hands, kissing them, murmuring soft
words; which, all unmeaning as they were of aught but sympathy with
the untold grief, did Mrs. Hamley good. She checked herself, smiling
sadly at Molly through the midst of her thick-coming sobs.

"It's only Osborne," said she, at last. "Roger has been telling us
about him."

"What about him?" asked Molly, eagerly.

"I knew on Monday; we had a letter--he said he had not done so well
as we had hoped--as he had hoped himself, poor fellow! He said he had
just passed, but was only low down among the _junior optimes_, and
not where he had expected, and had led us to expect. But the Squire
has never been at college, and does not understand college terms, and
he has been asking Roger all about it, and Roger has been telling
him, and it has made him so angry. But the squire hates college
slang;--he has never been there, you know; and he thought poor
Osborne was taking it too lightly, and he has been asking Roger about
it, and Roger--"

There was a fresh fit of the sobbing crying. Molly burst out,--"I
don't think Mr. Roger should have told; he had no need to begin so
soon about his brother's failure. Why, he hasn't been in the house an
hour!"

"Hush, hush, love!" said Mrs. Hamley. "Roger is so good. You don't
understand. The squire would begin and ask questions before Roger had
tasted food--as soon as ever we had got into the dining-room. And all
he said--to me, at any rate--was that Osborne was nervous, and that
if he could only have gone in for the Chancellor's medals, he would
have carried all before him. But Roger said that after failing like
this, he is not very likely to get a fellowship, which the Squire had
placed his hopes on. Osborne himself seemed so sure of it, that the
squire can't understand it, and is seriously angry, and growing more
so the more he talks about it. He has kept it in two or three days,
and that never suits him. He is always better when he is angry about
a thing at once, and doesn't let it smoulder in his mind. Poor, poor
Osborne! I did wish he had been coming straight home, instead of
going to these friends of his; I thought I could have comforted him.
But now I'm glad, for it will be better to let his father's anger
cool first."

So talking out what was in her heart, Mrs. Hamley became more
composed; and at length she dismissed Molly to dress for dinner, with
a kiss, saying,--

"You're a real blessing to mothers, child! You give one such pleasant
sympathy, both in one's gladness and in one's sorrow; in one's
pride (for I was so proud last week, so confident), and in one's
disappointment. And now your being a fourth at dinner will keep
us off that sore subject; there are times when a stranger in the
household is a wonderful help."

Molly thought over all that she had heard, as she was dressing
and putting on the terrible, over-smart plaid gown in honour of
the new arrival. Her unconscious fealty to Osborne was not in the
least shaken by his having come to grief at Cambridge. Only she was
indignant--with or without reason--against Roger, who seemed to have
brought the reality of bad news as an offering of first-fruits on his
return home.

She went down into the drawing-room with anything but a welcome to
him in her heart. He was standing by his mother; the Squire had not
yet made his appearance. Molly thought that the two were hand in hand
when she first opened the door, but she could not be quite sure. Mrs.
Hamley came a little forwards to meet her, and introduced her in so
fondly intimate a way to her son, that Molly, innocent and simple,
knowing nothing but Hollingford manners, which were anything but
formal, half put out her hand to shake hands with one of whom she had
heard so much--the son of such kind friends. She could only hope he
had not seen the movement, for he made no attempt to respond to it;
only bowed.

He was a tall powerfully-made young man, giving the impression
of strength more than elegance. His face was rather square,
ruddy-coloured (as his father had said), hair and eyes brown--the
latter rather deep-set beneath his thick eyebrows; and he had a trick
of wrinkling up his eyelids when he wanted particularly to observe
anything, which made his eyes look even smaller still at such times.
He had a large mouth, with excessively mobile lips; and another trick
of his was, that when he was amused at anything, he resisted the
impulse to laugh, by a droll manner of twitching and puckering up
his mouth, till at length the sense of humour had its way, and
his features relaxed, and he broke into a broad sunny smile; his
beautiful teeth--his only beautiful feature--breaking out with a
white gleam upon the red-brown countenance. These two tricks of
his--of crumpling up the eyelids, so as to concentrate the power
of sight, which made him look stern and thoughtful; and the odd
twitching of the lips that was preliminary to a smile, which made
him look intensely merry--gave the varying expressions of his face
a greater range "from grave to gay, from lively to severe," than is
common with most men. To Molly, who was not finely discriminative
in her glances at the stranger this first night, he simply appeared
"heavy-looking, clumsy," and "a person she was sure she should never
get on with." He certainly did not seem to care much what impression
he made upon his mother's visitor. He was at that age when young men
admire a formed beauty more than a face with any amount of future
capability of loveliness, and when they are morbidly conscious of the
difficulty of finding subjects of conversation in talking to girls
in a state of feminine hobbledehoyhood. Besides, his thoughts were
full of other subjects, which he did not intend to allow to ooze out
in words, yet he wanted to prevent any of that heavy silence which
he feared might be impending--with an angry and displeased father,
and a timorous and distressed mother. He only looked upon Molly as
a badly-dressed, and rather awkward girl, with black hair and an
intelligent face, who might help him in the task he had set himself
of keeping up a bright general conversation during the rest of the
evening; might help him--if she would, but she would not. She thought
him unfeeling in his talkativeness; his constant flow of words upon
indifferent subjects was a wonder and a repulsion to her. How could
he go on so cheerfully while his mother sat there, scarcely eating
anything, and doing her best, with ill-success, to swallow down the
tears that would keep rising to her eyes; when his father's heavy
brow was deeply clouded, and he evidently cared nothing--at first at
least--for all the chatter his son poured forth? Had Mr. Roger Hamley
no sympathy in him? She would show that she had some, at any rate. So
she quite declined the part, which he had hoped she would have taken,
of respondent, and possible questioner; and his work became more
and more like that of a man walking in a quagmire. Once the Squire
roused himself to speak to the butler; he felt the need of outward
stimulus--of a better vintage than usual.

"Bring up a bottle of the Burgundy with the yellow seal."

He spoke low; he had no spirit to speak in his usual voice. The
butler answered in the same tone. Molly sitting near them, and silent
herself, heard what they said.

"If you please, sir, there are not above six bottles of that seal
left; and it is Mr. Osborne's favourite wine."

The Squire turned round with a growl in his voice.

"Bring up a bottle of the Burgundy with the yellow seal, as I said."

The butler went away wondering. "Mr. Osborne's" likes and dislikes
had been the law of the house in general until now. If he had liked
any particular food or drink, any seat or place, any special degree
of warmth or coolness, his wishes were to be attended to; for he
was the heir, and he was delicate, and he was the clever one of
the family. All the out-of-doors men would have said the same.
Mr. Osborne wished a tree cut down, or kept standing, or had
such-and-such a fancy about the game, or desired something unusual
about the horses; and they had all to attend to it as if it were
law. But to-day the Burgundy with the yellow seal was to be brought;
and it was brought. Molly testified with quiet vehemence of action;
she never took wine, so she need not have been afraid of the man's
pouring it into her glass; but as an open mark of fealty to the
absent Osborne, however little it might be understood, she placed the
palm of her small brown hand over the top of the glass, and held it
there, till the wine had gone round, and Roger and his father were in
full enjoyment of it.

After dinner, too, the gentlemen lingered long over their dessert,
and Molly heard them laughing; and then she saw them loitering
about in the twilight out-of-doors; Roger hatless, his hands in his
pockets, lounging by his father's side, who was now able to talk in
his usual loud and cheerful way, forgetting Osborne. _Vż victis!_


[Illustration: V« VICTIS!]


And so in mute opposition on Molly's side, in polite indifference,
scarcely verging upon kindliness on his, Roger and she steered
clear of each other. He had many occupations in which he needed no
companionship, even if she had been qualified to give it. The worst
was, that she found he was in the habit of occupying the library,
her favourite retreat, in the mornings before Mrs. Hamley came down.
She opened the half-closed door a day or two after his return home,
and found him busy among books and papers, with which the large
leather-covered table was strewn; and she softly withdrew before he
could turn his head and see her, so as to distinguish her from one
of the housemaids. He rode out every day, sometimes with his father
about the outlying fields, sometimes far away for a good gallop.
Molly would have enjoyed accompanying him on these occasions, for
she was very fond of riding; and there had been some talk of sending
for her habit and grey pony when first she came to Hamley; only the
Squire, after some consideration, had said he so rarely did more
than go slowly from one field to another, where his labourers were
at work, that he feared she would find such slow work--ten minutes
riding through heavy land, twenty minutes sitting still on horseback,
listening to the directions he should have to give to his men--rather
dull. Now, when if she had had her pony here she might have ridden
out with Roger, without giving him any trouble--she would have taken
care of that--nobody seemed to think of renewing the proposal.

Altogether it was pleasanter before he came home.

Her father rode over pretty frequently; sometimes there were long
unaccountable absences, it was true; when his daughter began to
fidget after him, and to wonder what had become of him. But when
he made his appearance he had always good reasons to give; and the
right she felt that she had to his familiar household tenderness;
the power she possessed of fully understanding the exact value of
both his words and his silence, made these glimpses of intercourse
with him inexpressibly charming. Latterly her burden had always been,
"When may I come home, papa?" It was not that she was unhappy, or
uncomfortable; she was passionately fond of Mrs. Hamley, she was a
favourite of the Squire's, and could not as yet fully understand
why some people were so much afraid of him; and as for Roger, if he
did not add to her pleasure, he scarcely took away from it. But she
wanted to be at home once more. The reason why she could not tell;
but this she knew full well. Mr. Gibson reasoned with her till
she was weary of being completely convinced that it was right and
necessary for her to stay where she was. And then with an effort she
stopped the cry upon her tongue, for she saw that its repetition
harassed her father.

During this absence of hers Mr. Gibson was drifting into matrimony.
He was partly aware of whither he was going; and partly it was
like the soft floating movement of a dream. He was more passive
than active in the affair; though, if his reason had not fully
approved of the step he was tending to--if he had not believed that
a second marriage was the very best way of cutting the Gordian knot
of domestic difficulties, he could have made an effort without any
great trouble, and extricated himself without pain from the mesh
of circumstances. It happened in this manner:--Lady Cumnor having
married her two eldest daughters, found her labours as a chaperone to
Lady Harriet, the youngest, considerably lightened by co-operation;
and, at length, she had leisure to be an invalid. She was, however,
too energetic to allow herself this indulgence constantly; only she
permitted herself to break down occasionally after a long course of
dinners, late hours, and London atmosphere: and then, leaving Lady
Harriet with either Lady Cuxhaven or Lady Agnes Manners, she betook
herself to the comparative quiet of the Towers, where she found
occupation in doing her benevolence, which was sadly neglected in
the hurly-burly of London. This particular summer she had broken
down earlier than usual, and longed for the repose of the country.
She believed that her state of health, too, was more serious than
previously; but she did not say a word of this to her husband or
daughters; reserving her confidence for Mr. Gibson's ears. She
did not wish to take Lady Harriet away from the gaieties of town
which she was thoroughly enjoying, by any complaint of hers, which
might, after all, be ill-founded; and yet she did not quite like
being without a companion in the three weeks or a month that might
intervene before her family would join her at the Towers, especially
as the annual festivity to the school visitors was impending; and
both the school and the visit of the ladies connected with it, had
rather lost the zest of novelty.

"Thursday the 19th, Harriet," said Lady Cumnor, meditatively; "what
do you say to coming down to the Towers on the 18th, and helping me
over that long day. You could stay in the country till Monday, and
have a few days' rest and good air; you would return a great deal
fresher to the remainder of your gaieties. Your father would bring
you down, I know: indeed, he is coming naturally."

"Oh, mamma!" said Lady Harriet, the youngest daughter of the
house--the prettiest, the most indulged; "I cannot go; there's the
water-party up to Maidenhead on the 20th, I should be so sorry to
miss it: and Mrs. Duncan's ball, and Grisi's concert; please, don't
want me. Besides, I should do no good. I can't make provincial
small-talk; I'm not up in the local politics of Hollingford. I should
be making mischief, I know I should."

"Very well, my dear," said Lady Cumnor, sighing, "I had forgotten the
Maidenhead water-party, or I would not have asked you."

"What a pity it isn't the Eton holidays, so that you could have had
Hollingford's boys to help you to do the honours, mamma. They are
such affable little prigs. It was the greatest fun to watch them last
year at Sir Edward's, doing the honours of their grandfather's house
to much such a collection of humble admirers as you get together at
the Towers. I shall never forget seeing Edgar gravely squiring about
an old lady in a portentous black bonnet, and giving her information
in the correctest grammar possible."

"Well, I like those lads," said Lady Cuxhaven; "they are on the way
to become true gentlemen. But, mamma, why shouldn't you have Clare to
stay with you? You like her, and she is just the person to save you
the troubles of hospitality to the Hollingford people, and we should
all be so much more comfortable if we knew you had her with you."

"Yes, Clare would do very well," said Lady Cumnor; "but isn't it her
school-time or something? We must not interfere with her school so
as to injure her, for I am afraid she is not doing too well as it is;
and she has been so very unlucky ever since she left us--first her
husband died, and then she lost Lady Davies' situation, and then Mrs.
Maude's, and now Mr. Preston told your father it was all she could
do to pay her way in Ashcombe, though Lord Cumnor lets her have the
house rent-free."

"I can't think how it is," said Lady Harriet. "She's not very wise,
certainly; but she is so useful and agreeable, and has such pleasant
manners, I should have thought any one who wasn't particular about
education would have been charmed to keep her as a governess."

"What do you mean by not being particular about education? Most
people who keep governesses for their children are supposed to be
particular," said Lady Cuxhaven.

"Well, they think themselves so, I've no doubt; but I call you
particular, Mary, and I don't think mamma was; but she thought
herself so, I'm sure."

"I can't think what you mean, Harriet," said Lady Cumnor, a good deal
annoyed at this speech of her clever, heedless, youngest daughter.

"Oh dear, mamma, you did everything you could think of for us; but
you see you'd ever so many other engrossing interests, and Mary
hardly ever allows her love for her husband to interfere with her
all-absorbing care for the children. You gave us the best of masters
in every department, and Clare to dragonize and keep us up to
our preparation for them, as well as ever she could; but then you
know, or rather you didn't know, some of the masters admired our
very pretty governess, and there was a kind of respectable veiled
flirtation going on, which never came to anything, to be sure; and
then you were often so overwhelmed with your business as a great
lady--fashionable and benevolent, and all that sort of thing--that
you used to call Clare away from us at the most critical times of
our lessons, to write your notes, or add up your accounts, and the
consequence is, that I'm about the most ill-informed girl in London.
Only Mary was so capitally trained by good awkward Miss Benson, that
she is always full to overflowing with accurate knowledge, and her
glory is reflected upon me."

"Do you think what Harriet says is true, Mary?" asked Lady Cumnor,
rather anxiously.

"I was so little with Clare in the school-room. I used to read French
with her; she had a beautiful accent, I remember. Both Agnes and
Harriet were very fond of her. I used to be jealous for Miss Benson's
sake, and perhaps--" Lady Cuxhaven paused a minute--"that made me
fancy that she had a way of flattering and indulging them--not quite
conscientious, I used to think. But girls are severe judges, and
certainly she had had an anxious enough lifetime. I am always so glad
when we can have her, and give her a little pleasure. The only thing
that makes me uneasy now is the way in which she seems to send her
daughter away from her so much; we never can persuade her to bring
Cynthia with her when she comes to see us."

"Now that I call ill-natured," said Lady Harriet; "here is a poor
dear woman trying to earn her livelihood, first as a governess, and
what could she do with her daughter then, but send her to school? and
after that, when Clare is asked to go visiting, and is too modest
to bring her girl with her--besides all the expense of the journey,
and the rigging out--Mary finds fault with her for her modesty and
economy."

"Well, after all, we are not discussing Clare and her affairs, but
trying to plan for mamma's comfort. I don't see that she can do
better than ask Mrs. Kirkpatrick to come to the Towers--as soon as
her holidays begin, I mean."

"Here is her last letter," said Lady Cumnor, who had been searching
for it in her escritoire, while her daughters were talking. Holding
her glasses before her eyes, she began to read, "'My wonted
misfortunes appear to have followed me to Ashcombe'--um, um, um;
that's not it--'Mr. Preston is most kind in sending me fruit and
flowers from the Manor-house, according to dear Lord Cumnor's kind
injunction.' Oh, here it is! 'The vacation begins on the 11th,
according to the usual custom of schools in Ashcombe; and I must
then try and obtain some change of air and scene, in order to fit
myself for the resumption of my duties on the 10th of August.' You
see, girls, she would be at liberty, if she has not made any other
arrangement for spending her holidays. To-day is the 15th."

"I'll write to her at once, mamma," Lady Harriet said. "Clare and I
are always great friends; I was her confidant in her loves with poor
Mr. Kirkpatrick, and we've kept up our intimacy ever since. I know of
three offers she had besides."

"I sincerely hope Miss Bowes is not telling her love-affairs to Grace
or Lily. Why, Harriet, you could not have been older than Grace when
Clare was married!" said Lady Cuxhaven, in maternal alarm.

"No; but I was well versed in the tender passion, thanks to novels.
Now I daresay you don't admit novels into your school-room, Mary; so
your daughters wouldn't be able to administer discreet sympathy to
their governess in case she was the heroine of a love-affair."

"My dear Harriet, don't let me hear you talking of love in that way;
it is not pretty. Love is a serious thing."

"My dear mamma, your exhortations are just eighteen years too late.
I've talked all the freshness off love, and that's the reason I'm
tired of the subject."

This last speech referred to a recent refusal of Lady Harriet's,
which had displeased Lady Cumnor, and rather annoyed my lord; as
they, the parents, could see no objection to the gentleman in
question. Lady Cuxhaven did not want to have the subject brought up,
so she hastened to say,--

"Do ask the poor little daughter to come with her mother to the
Towers; why, she must be seventeen or more; she would really be a
companion to you, mamma, if her mother was unable to come."

"I was not ten when Clare married, and I'm nearly nine-and-twenty,"
added Lady Harriet.

"Don't speak of it, Harriet; at any rate you are but eight-and-twenty
now, and you look a great deal younger. There is no need to be always
bringing up your age on every possible occasion."

"There was need of it now, though. I wanted to make out how old
Cynthia Kirkpatrick was. I think she can't be far from eighteen."

"She is at school at Boulogne, I know; and so I don't think she can
be as old as that. Clare says something about her in this letter:
'Under these circumstances' (the ill-success of her school), 'I
cannot think myself justified in allowing myself the pleasure of
having darling Cynthia at home for the holidays; especially as the
period when the vacation in French schools commences differs from
that common in England; and it might occasion some confusion in my
arrangements if darling Cynthia were to come to Ashcombe, and occupy
my time and thoughts so immediately before the commencement of my
scholastic duties as the 8th of August, on which day her vacation
begins, which is but two days before my holidays end.' So, you see,
Clare would be quite at liberty to come to me, and I daresay it would
be a very nice change for her."

"And Hollingford is busy seeing after his new laboratory at the
Towers, and is constantly backwards and forwards. And Agnes wants to
go there for change of air, as soon as she is strong enough after
her confinement. And even my own dear insatiable 'me' will have had
enough of gaiety in two or three weeks, if this hot weather lasts."

"I think I may be able to come down for a few days too, if you will
let me, mamma; and I'll bring Grace, who is looking rather pale and
weedy; growing too fast, I'm afraid. So I hope you won't be dull."

"My dear," said Lady Cumnor, drawing herself up, "I should be ashamed
of feeling dull with my resources; my duties to others and to
myself!"

So the plan in its present shape was told to Lord Cumnor, who highly
approved of it; as he always did of every project of his wife's. Lady
Cumnor's character was perhaps a little too ponderous for him in
reality, but he was always full of admiration for all her words and
deeds, and used to boast of her wisdom, her benevolence, her power
and dignity, in her absence, as if by this means he could buttress up
his own more feeble nature.

"Very good--very good, indeed! Clare to join you at the Towers!
Capital! I couldn't have planned it better myself! I shall go down
with you on Wednesday in time for the jollification on Thursday. I
always enjoy that day; they are such nice, friendly people, those
good Hollingford ladies. Then I'll have a day with Sheepshanks, and
perhaps I may ride over to Ashcombe and see Preston--Brown Jess can
do it in a day, eighteen miles--to be sure! But there's back again to
the Towers!--how much is twice eighteen--thirty?"

"Thirty-six," said Lady Cumnor, sharply.

"So it is; you're always right, my dear. Preston's a clever, sharp
fellow."

"I don't like him," said my lady.

"He takes looking after; but he's a sharp fellow. He's such a
good-looking man, too, I wonder you don't like him."

"I never think whether a land-agent is handsome or not. They don't
belong to the class of people whose appearance I notice."

"To be sure not. But he is a handsome fellow; and what should make
you like him is the interest he takes in Clare and her prospects. He
is constantly suggesting something that can be done to her house, and
I know he sends her fruit, and flowers, and game just as regularly as
we should ourselves if we lived at Ashcombe."

"How old is he?" said Lady Cumnor, with a faint suspicion of motives
in her mind.

"About twenty-seven, I think. Ah! I see what is in your ladyship's
head. No! no! he's too young for that. You must look out for some
middle-aged man, if you want to get poor Clare married; Preston won't
do."

"I'm not a match-maker, as you might know. I never did it for my own
daughters. I'm not likely to do it for Clare," said she, leaning back
languidly.

"Well! you might do a worse thing. I'm beginning to think she'll
never get on as a schoolmistress, though why she shouldn't, I'm sure
I don't know; for she's an uncommonly pretty woman for her age, and
her having lived in our family, and your having had her so often with
you, ought to go a good way. I say, my lady, what do you think of
Gibson? He would be just the right age--widower--lives near the
Towers?"

"I told you just now I was no match-maker, my lord. I suppose we had
better go by the old road--the people at those inns know us?"

And so they passed on to speaking about other things than Mrs.
Kirkpatrick and her prospects, scholastic or matrimonial.




CHAPTER IX.

THE WIDOWER AND THE WIDOW.


Mrs. Kirkpatrick was only too happy to accept Lady Cumnor's
invitation. It was what she had been hoping for, but hardly daring to
expect, as she believed that the family were settled in London for
some time to come. The Towers was a pleasant and luxurious house in
which to pass her holidays; and though she was not one to make deep
plans, or to look far ahead, she was quite aware of the prestige
which her being able to say she had been staying with "dear Lady
Cumnor" at the Towers, was likely to give her and her school in
the eyes of a good many people; so she gladly prepared to join her
ladyship on the 17th. Her wardrobe did not require much arrangement;
if it had done, the poor lady would not have had much money to
appropriate to the purpose. She was very pretty and graceful; and
that goes a great way towards carrying off shabby clothes; and it was
her taste more than any depth of feeling, that had made her persevere
in wearing all the delicate tints--the violets and grays--which, with
a certain admixture of black, constitute half-mourning. This style of
becoming dress she was supposed to wear in memory of Mr. Kirkpatrick;
in reality because it was both lady-like and economical. Her
beautiful hair was of that rich auburn that hardly ever turns gray;
and partly out of consciousness of its beauty, and partly because the
washing of caps is expensive, she did not wear anything on her head;
her complexion had the vivid tints that often accompany the kind
of hair which has once been red; and the only injury her skin had
received from advancing years was that the colouring was rather more
brilliant than delicate, and varied less with every passing emotion.
She could no longer blush; and at eighteen she had been very proud
of her blushes. Her eyes were soft, large, and china-blue in colour;
they had not much expression or shadow about them, which was perhaps
owing to the flaxen colour of her eyelashes. Her figure was a little
fuller than it used to be, but her movements were as soft and sinuous
as ever. Altogether, she looked much younger than her age, which
was not far short of forty. She had a very pleasant voice, and read
aloud well and distinctly, which Lady Cumnor liked. Indeed, for some
inexplicable reason, she was a greater, more positive favourite with
Lady Cumnor than with any of the rest of the family, though they all
liked her up to a certain point, and found it agreeably useful to
have any one in the house who was so well acquainted with their ways
and habits; so ready to talk, when a little trickle of conversation
was required; so willing to listen, and to listen with tolerable
intelligence, if the subjects spoken about did not refer to serious
solid literature, or science, or politics, or social economy. About
novels and poetry, travels and gossip, personal details, or anecdotes
of any kind, she always made exactly the remarks which are expected
from an agreeable listener; and she had sense enough to confine
herself to those short expressions of wonder, admiration, and
astonishment, which may mean anything, when more recondite things
were talked about.

It was a very pleasant change to a poor unsuccessful schoolmistress
to leave her own house, full of battered and shabby furniture (she
had taken the good-will and furniture of her predecessor at a
valuation, two or three years before), where the look-out was as
gloomy, and the surrounding as squalid, as is often the case in the
smaller streets of a country town, and to come bowling through the
Towers Park in the luxurious carriage sent to meet her; to alight,
and feel secure that the well-trained servants would see after her
bags, and umbrella, and parasol, and cloak, without her loading
herself with all these portable articles, as she had had to do
while following the wheelbarrow containing her luggage in going to
the Ashcombe coach-office that morning; to pass up the deep-piled
carpets of the broad shallow stairs into my lady's own room, cool and
deliciously fresh, even on this sultry day, and fragrant with great
bowls of freshly gathered roses of every shade of colour. There were
two or three new novels lying uncut on the table; the daily papers,
the magazines. Every chair was an easy-chair of some kind or other;
and all covered with French chintz that mimicked the real flowers in
the garden below. She was familiar with the bedroom called hers, to
which she was soon ushered by Lady Cumnor's maid. It seemed to her
far more like home than the dingy place she had left that morning;
it was so natural to her to like dainty draperies, and harmonious
colouring, and fine linen, and soft raiment. She sate down in the
arm-chair by the bed-side, and wondered over her fate something in
this fashion--

"One would think it was an easy enough thing to deck a looking-glass
like that with muslin and pink ribbons; and yet how hard it is to
keep it up! People don't know how hard it is till they've tried as
I have. I made my own glass just as pretty when I first went to
Ashcombe; but the muslin got dirty, and the pink ribbons faded, and
it is so difficult to earn money to renew them; and when one has got
the money one hasn't the heart to spend it all at once. One thinks
and one thinks how one can get the most good out of it; and a new
gown, or a day's pleasure, or some hot-house fruit, or some piece of
elegance that can be seen and noticed in one's drawing-room, carries
the day, and good-by to prettily decked looking-glasses. Now here,
money is like the air they breathe. No one even asks or knows how
much the washing costs, or what pink ribbon is a yard. Ah! it would
be different if they had to earn every penny as I have! They would
have to calculate, like me, how to get the most pleasure out of it.
I wonder if I am to go on all my life toiling and moiling for money?
It's not natural. Marriage is the natural thing; then the husband
has all that kind of dirty work to do, and his wife sits in the
drawing-room like a lady. I did, when poor Kirkpatrick was alive.
Heigho! it's a sad thing to be a widow."

Then there was the contrast between the dinners which she had to
share with her scholars at Ashcombe--rounds of beef, legs of mutton,
great dishes of potatoes, and large batter-puddings, with the tiny
meal of exquisitely cooked delicacies, sent up on old Chelsea china,
that was served every day to the earl and countess and herself at
the Towers. She dreaded the end of her holidays as much as the most
home-loving of her pupils. But at this time that end was some weeks
off, so Clare shut her eyes to the future, and tried to relish the
present to its fullest extent. A disturbance to the pleasant, even
course of the summer days came in the indisposition of Lady Cumnor.
Her husband had gone back to London, and she and Mrs. Kirkpatrick had
been left to the very even tenor of life, which was according to my
lady's wish just now. In spite of her languor and fatigue, she had
gone through the day when the school visitors came to the Towers, in
full dignity, dictating clearly all that was to be done, what walks
were to be taken, what hothouses to be seen, and when the party were
to return to the "collation." She herself remained indoors, with
one or two ladies who had ventured to think that the fatigue or the
heat might be too much for them, and who had therefore declined
accompanying the ladies in charge of Mrs. Kirkpatrick, or those other
favoured few to whom Lord Cumnor was explaining the new buildings
in his farm-yard. "With the utmost condescension," as her hearers
afterwards expressed it, Lady Cumnor told them all about her married
daughters' establishments, nurseries, plans for the education of
their children, and manner of passing the day. But the exertion tired
her; and when every one had left, the probability is that she would
have gone to lie down and rest, had not her husband made an unlucky
remark in the kindness of his heart. He came up to her and put his
hand on her shoulder.

"I'm afraid you're sadly tired, my lady?" he said.

She braced her muscles, and drew herself up, saying coldly,--

"When I am tired, Lord Cumnor, I will tell you so." And her fatigue
showed itself during the rest of the evening in her sitting
particularly upright, and declining all offers of easy-chairs or
foot-stools, and refusing the insult of a suggestion that they
should all go to bed earlier. She went on in something of this
kind of manner as long as Lord Cumnor remained at the Towers. Mrs.
Kirkpatrick was quite deceived by it, and kept assuring Lord Cumnor
that she had never seen dear Lady Cumnor looking better, or so
strong. But he had an affectionate heart, if a blundering head; and
though he could give no reason for his belief, he was almost certain
his wife was not well. Yet he was too much afraid of her to send for
Mr. Gibson without her permission. His last words to Clare were--

"It's such a comfort to leave my lady to you; only don't you be
deluded by her ways. She'll not show she's ill till she can't help
it. Consult with Bradley" (Lady Cumnor's "own woman,"--she disliked
the new-fangledness of "lady's-maid"); "and if I were you, I'd send
and ask Gibson to call--you might make any kind of a pretence,"--and
then the idea he had had in London of the fitness of a match
between the two coming into his head just now, he could not help
adding,--"Get him to come and see you, he's a very agreeable man;
Lord Hollingford says there's no one like him in these parts: and he
might be looking at my lady while he was talking to you, and see if
he thinks her really ill. And let me know what he says about her."

But Clare was just as great a coward about doing anything for Lady
Cumnor which she had not expressly ordered, as Lord Cumnor himself.
She knew she might fall into such disgrace if she sent for Mr. Gibson
without direct permission, that she might never be asked to stay at
the Towers again; and the life there, monotonous in its smoothness of
luxury as it might be to some, was exactly to her taste. She in her
turn tried to put upon Bradley the duty which Lord Cumnor had put
upon her.

"Mrs. Bradley," she said one day, "are you quite comfortable about
my lady's health? Lord Cumnor fancied that she was looking worn and
ill?"

"Indeed, Mrs. Kirkpatrick, I don't think my lady is herself. I can't
persuade myself as she is, though if you was to question me till
night I couldn't tell you why."

"Don't you think you could make some errand to Hollingford, and see
Mr. Gibson, and ask him to come round this way some day, and make a
call on Lady Cumnor?"

"It would be as much as my place is worth, Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Till my
lady's dying day, if Providence keeps her in her senses, she'll have
everything done her own way, or not at all. There's only Lady Harriet
that can manage her the least, and she not always."

"Well, then--we must hope that there is nothing the matter with her;
and I daresay there is not. She says there is not, and she ought to
know best herself."

But a day or two after this conversation took place, Lady Cumnor
startled Mrs. Kirkpatrick, by saying suddenly,--"Clare, I wish you'd
write a note to Mr. Gibson, saying I should like to see him this
afternoon. I thought he would have called of himself before now. He
ought to have done so, to pay his respects."

Mr. Gibson had been far too busy in his profession to have time for
mere visits of ceremony, though he knew quite well he was neglecting
what was expected of him. But the district of which he may be said to
have had medical charge was full of a bad kind of low fever, which
took up all his time and thought, and often made him very thankful
that Molly was out of the way in the quiet shades of Hamley.

His domestic "rows" had not healed over in the least, though he
was obliged to put the perplexities on one side for the time. The
last drop--the final straw, had been an impromptu visit of Lord
Hollingford's, whom he had met in the town one forenoon. They had had
a good deal to say to each other about some new scientific discovery,
with the details of which Lord Hollingford was well acquainted,
while Mr. Gibson was ignorant and deeply interested. At length Lord
Hollingford said suddenly,--

"Gibson, I wonder if you'd give me some lunch; I've been a good
deal about since my seven-o'clock breakfast, and am getting quite
ravenous."

Now Mr. Gibson was only too much pleased to show hospitality to one
whom he liked and respected so much as Lord Hollingford, and he
gladly took him home with him to the early family dinner. But it was
just at the time when the cook was sulking at Bethia's dismissal--and
she chose to be unpunctual and careless. There was no successor to
Bethia as yet appointed to wait at the meals. So, though Mr. Gibson
knew well that bread-and-cheese, cold beef, or the simplest food
available, would have been welcome to the hungry lord, he could not
get either these things for luncheon, or even the family dinner, at
anything like the proper time, in spite of all his ringing, and as
much anger as he liked to show, for fear of making Lord Hollingford
uncomfortable. At last dinner was ready, but the poor host saw
the want of nicety--almost the want of cleanliness, in all its
accompaniments--dingy plate, dull-looking glass, a table-cloth that,
if not absolutely dirty, was anything but fresh in its splashed and
rumpled condition, and compared it in his own mind with the dainty
delicacy with which even a loaf of brown bread was served up at
his guest's home. He did not apologize directly, but, after dinner,
just as they were parting, he said,--"You see a man like me--a
widower--with a daughter who cannot always be at home--has not the
regulated household which would enable me to command the small
portions of time I can spend there."

He made no allusion to the comfortless meal of which they had both
partaken, though it was full in his mind. Nor was it absent from Lord
Hollingford's as he made reply,--

"True, true. Yet a man like you ought to be free from any thought of
household cares. You ought to have somebody. How old is Miss Gibson?"

"Seventeen. It's a very awkward age for a motherless girl."

"Yes; very. I have only boys, but it must be very awkward with
a girl. Excuse me, Gibson, but we're talking like friends. Have
you never thought of marrying again? It wouldn't be like a first
marriage, of course; but if you found a sensible, agreeable woman of
thirty or so, I really think you couldn't do better than take her to
manage your home, and so save you either discomfort or worry; and,
besides, she would be able to give your daughter that kind of tender
supervision which, I fancy, all girls of that age require. It's a
delicate subject, but you'll excuse my having spoken frankly."

Mr. Gibson had thought of this advice several times since it was
given; but it was a case of "first catch your hare." Where was the
"sensible and agreeable woman of thirty or so?" Not Miss Browning,
nor Miss Phoebe, nor Miss Goodenough. Among his country patients
there were two classes pretty distinctly marked: farmers, whose
children were unrefined and uneducated; squires, whose daughters
would, indeed, think the world was coming to a pretty pass, if they
were to marry a country surgeon.

But the first day on which Mr. Gibson paid his visit to Lady Cumnor,
he began to think it possible that Mrs. Kirkpatrick was his "hare."
He rode away with slack rein, thinking over what he knew of her,
more than about the prescriptions he should write, or the way he was
going. He remembered her as a very pretty Miss Clare: the governess
who had the scarlet fever; that was in his wife's days, a long time
ago; he could hardly understand Mrs. Kirkpatrick's youthfulness
of appearance when he thought how long. Then he had heard of her
marriage to a curate; and the next day (or so it seemed, he could not
recollect the exact duration of the interval), of his death. He knew,
in some way, that she had been living ever since as a governess in
different families; but that she had always been a great favourite
with the family at the Towers, for whom, quite independent of their
rank, he had a true respect. A year or two ago he had heard that she
had taken the good-will of a school at Ashcombe; a small town close
to another property of Lord Cumnor's, in the same county. Ashcombe
was a larger estate than that near Hollingford, but the old
Manor-house there was not nearly so good a residence as the Towers;
so it was given up to Mr. Preston, the land-agent for the Ashcombe
property, just as Mr. Sheepshanks was for that at Hollingford.
There were a few rooms at the Manor-house reserved for the
occasional visits of the family, otherwise Mr. Preston, a handsome
young bachelor, had it all to himself. Mr. Gibson knew that Mrs.
Kirkpatrick had one child, a daughter, who must be much about the
same age as Molly. Of course she had very little, if any, property.
But he himself had lived carefully, and had a few thousands well
invested; besides which, his professional income was good, and
increasing rather than diminishing every year. By the time he had
arrived at this point in his consideration of the case, he was at the
house of the next patient on his round, and he put away all thought
of matrimony and Mrs. Kirkpatrick for the time. Once again, in the
course of the day, he remembered with a certain pleasure that Molly
had told him some little details connected with her unlucky detention
at the Towers five or six years ago, which had made him feel at the
time as if Mrs. Kirkpatrick had behaved very kindly to his little
girl. So there the matter rested for the present, as far as he was
concerned.

Lady Cumnor was out of health; but not so ill as she had been
fancying herself during all those days when the people about her
dared not send for the doctor. It was a great relief to her to have
Mr. Gibson to decide for her what she was to do; what to eat, drink,
avoid. Such decisions _ab extra_, are sometimes a wonderful relief
to those whose habit it has been to decide, not only for themselves,
but for every one else; and occasionally the relaxation of the strain
which a character for infallible wisdom brings with it, does much to
restore health. Mrs. Kirkpatrick thought in her secret soul that she
had never found it so easy to get on with Lady Cumnor; and Bradley
and she had never done singing the praises of Mr. Gibson, "who always
managed my lady so beautifully."

Reports were duly sent up to my lord, but he and his daughters were
strictly forbidden to come down. Lady Cumnor wished to be weak
and languid, and uncertain both in body and mind, without family
observation. It was a condition so different to anything she had
ever been in before, that she was unconsciously afraid of losing her
prestige, if she was seen in it. Sometimes she herself wrote the
daily bulletins; at other times she bade Clare do it, but she would
always see the letters. Any answers she received from her daughters
she used to read herself, occasionally imparting some of their
contents to "that good Clare." But anybody might read my lord's
letters. There was no great fear of family secrets oozing out in his
sprawling lines of affection. But once Mrs. Kirkpatrick came upon a
sentence in a letter from Lord Cumnor, which she was reading out loud
to his wife, that caught her eye before she came to it, and if she
could have skipped it and kept it for private perusal, she would
gladly have done so. My lady was too sharp for her, though. In her
opinion "Clare was a good creature, but not clever," the truth
being that she was not always quick at resources, though tolerably
unscrupulous in the use of them.

"Read on. What are you stopping for? There is no bad news, is there,
about Agnes?--Give me the letter."

Lady Cumnor read, half aloud,--

"'How are Clare and Gibson getting on? You despised my advice to help
on that affair, but I really think a little match-making would be a
very pleasant amusement now that you are shut up in the house; and I
cannot conceive any marriage more suitable.'"

"Oh!" said Lady Cumnor, laughing, "it was awkward for you to come
upon that, Clare: I don't wonder you stopped short. You gave me a
terrible fright, though."

"Lord Cumnor is so fond of joking," said Mrs. Kirkpatrick, a little
flurried, yet quite recognizing the truth of his last words,--"I
cannot conceive any marriage more suitable." She wondered what Lady
Cumnor thought of it. Lord Cumnor wrote as if there was really a
chance. It was not an unpleasant idea; it brought a faint smile out
upon her face, as she sat by Lady Cumnor, while the latter took her
afternoon nap.




CHAPTER X.

A CRISIS.


[Illustration (untitled)]

Mrs. Kirkpatrick had been reading aloud till Lady Cumnor fell asleep,
the book rested on her knee, just kept from falling by her hold. She
was looking out of the window, not seeing the trees in the park, nor
the glimpses of the hills beyond, but thinking how pleasant it would
be to have a husband once more;--some one who would work while she
sate at her elegant ease in a prettily-furnished drawing-room; and
she was rapidly investing this imaginary breadwinner with the form
and features of the country surgeon, when there was a slight tap
at the door, and almost before she could rise, the object of her
thoughts came in. She felt herself blush, and she was not displeased
at the consciousness. She advanced to meet him, making a sign towards
her sleeping ladyship.

"Very good," said he, in a low voice, casting a professional eye on
the slumbering figure; "can I speak to you for a minute or two in the
library?"

"Is he going to offer?" thought she, with a sudden palpitation, and
a conviction of her willingness to accept a man whom an hour before
she had simply looked upon as one of the category of unmarried men to
whom matrimony was possible.

He was only going to make one or two medical inquiries; she found
that out very speedily, and considered the conversation as rather
flat to her, though it might be instructive to him. She was not aware
that he finally made up his mind to propose, during the time that
she was speaking--answering his questions in many words, but he was
accustomed to winnow the chaff from the corn; and her voice was so
soft, her accent so pleasant, that it struck him as particularly
agreeable after the broad country accent he was perpetually hearing.
Then the harmonious colours of her dress, and her slow and graceful
movements, had something of the same soothing effect upon his nerves
that a cat's purring has upon some people's. He began to think
that he should be fortunate if he could win her, for his own sake.
Yesterday he had looked upon her more as a possible stepmother
for Molly; to-day he thought more of her as a wife for himself.
The remembrance of Lord Cumnor's letter gave her a very becoming
consciousness; she wished to attract, and hoped that she was
succeeding. Still they only talked of the countess's state for some
time: then a lucky shower came on. Mr. Gibson did not care a jot for
rain, but just now it gave him an excuse for lingering.

"It's very stormy weather," said he.

"Yes, very. My daughter writes me word, that for two days last week
the packet could not sail from Boulogne."

"Miss Kirkpatrick is at Boulogne, is she?"

"Yes, poor girl; she is at school there, trying to perfect herself
in the French language. But, Mr. Gibson, you must not call her Miss
Kirkpatrick. Cynthia remembers you with so much--affection, I may
say. She was your little patient when she had the measles here four
years ago, you know. Pray call her Cynthia; she would be quite hurt
at such a formal name as Miss Kirkpatrick from you."

"Cynthia seems to me such an out-of-the-way name, only fit for
poetry, not for daily use."

"It is mine," said Mrs. Kirkpatrick, in a plaintive tone of reproach.
"I was christened Hyacinth, and her poor father would have her called
after me. I'm sorry you don't like it."

Mr. Gibson did not know what to say. He was not quite prepared to
plunge into the directly personal style. While he was hesitating, she
went on--

"Hyacinth Clare! Once upon a time I was quite proud of my pretty
name; and other people thought it pretty, too."

"I've no doubt--" Mr. Gibson began; and then stopped.

"Perhaps I did wrong in yielding to his wish, to have her called by
such a romantic name. It may excite prejudice against her in some
people; and, poor child! she will have enough to struggle with. A
young daughter is a great charge, Mr. Gibson, especially when there
is only one parent to look after her."

"You are quite right," said he, recalled to the remembrance of Molly;
"though I should have thought that a girl who is so fortunate as to
have a mother could not feel the loss of her father so acutely as one
who is motherless must suffer from her deprivation."

"You are thinking of your own daughter. It was careless of me to say
what I did. Dear child! how well I remember her sweet little face as
she lay sleeping on my bed. I suppose she is nearly grown-up now. She
must be near my Cynthia's age. How I should like to see her!"

"I hope you will. I should like you to see her. I should like you to
love my poor little Molly,--to love her as your own--" He swallowed
down something that rose in his throat, and was nearly choking him.

"Is he going to offer? _Is_ he?" she wondered; and she began to
tremble in the suspense before he next spoke.

"Could you love her as your daughter? Will you try? Will you give
me the right of introducing you to her as her future mother; as my
wife?"

There! he had done it--whether it was wise or foolish--he had done
it! but he was aware that the question as to its wisdom came into his
mind the instant that the words were said past recall.

She hid her face in her hands.

"Oh! Mr. Gibson," she said; and then, a little to his surprise, and a
great deal to her own, she burst into hysterical tears: it was such
a wonderful relief to feel that she need not struggle any more for a
livelihood.

"My dear--my dearest," said he, trying to soothe her with word and
caress; but, just at the moment, uncertain what name he ought to
use. After her sobbing had abated a little, she said herself, as if
understanding his difficulty,--

"Call me Hyacinth--your own Hyacinth. I can't bear 'Clare,' it does
so remind me of being a governess, and those days are all past now."

"Yes; but surely no one can have been more valued, more beloved than
you have been in this family at least."

"Oh, yes! they have been very good. But still one has always had to
remember one's position."

"We ought to tell Lady Cumnor," said he, thinking, perhaps, more of
the various duties which lay before him in consequence of the step he
had just taken, than of what his future bride was saying.

"You'll tell her, won't you?" said she, looking up in his face with
beseeching eyes. "I always like other people to tell her things, and
then I can see how she takes them."

"Certainly! I will do whatever you wish. Shall we go and see if she
is awake now?"

"No! I think not. I had better prepare her. You will come to-morrow,
won't you? and you will tell her then."

"Yes; that will be best. I ought to tell Molly first. She has the
right to know. I do hope you and she will love each other dearly."

"Oh, yes! I'm sure we shall. Then you'll come to-morrow and tell Lady
Cumnor? And I'll prepare her."

"I don't see what preparation is necessary; but you know best, my
dear. When can we arrange for you and Molly to meet?"

Just then a servant came in, and the pair started apart.

"Her ladyship is awake, and wishes to see Mr. Gibson."

They both followed the man upstairs; Mrs. Kirkpatrick trying hard
to look as if nothing had happened, for she particularly wished
"to prepare" Lady Cumnor; that is to say, to give her version of Mr.
Gibson's extreme urgency, and her own coy unwillingness.

But Lady Cumnor had observant eyes in sickness as well as in health.
She had gone to sleep with the recollection of the passage in her
husband's letter full in her mind, and, perhaps, it gave a direction
to her wakening ideas.

"I'm glad you're not gone, Mr. Gibson. I wanted to tell you-- What's
the matter with you both? What have you been saying to Clare? I'm
sure something has happened."

There was nothing for it, in Mr. Gibson's opinion, but to make a
clean breast of it, and tell her ladyship all. He turned round, and
took hold of Mrs. Kirkpatrick's hand, and said out straight, "I have
been asking Mrs. Kirkpatrick to be my wife, and to be a mother to my
child; and she has consented. I hardly know how to thank her enough
in words."

"Umph! I don't see any objection. I daresay you'll be very happy.
I'm very glad of it! Here! shake hands with me, both of you." Then
laughing a little, she added, "It does not seem to me that any
exertion has been required on my part."

Mr. Gibson looked perplexed at these words. Mrs. Kirkpatrick
reddened.

"Did she not tell you? Oh, then, I must. It's too good a joke to be
lost, especially as everything has ended so well. When Lord Cumnor's
letter came this morning--this very morning--I gave it to Clare to
read aloud to me, and I saw she suddenly came to a full stop, where
no full stop could be, and I thought it was something about Agnes,
so I took the letter and read--stay! I'll read the sentence to you.
Where's the letter, Clare? Oh! don't trouble yourself, here it is.
'How are Clare and Gibson getting on? You despised my advice to help
on that affair, but I really think a little match-making would be a
very pleasant amusement, now that you are shut up in the house; and
I cannot conceive any marriage more suitable.' You see, you have my
lord's full approbation. But I must write, and tell him you have
managed your own affairs without any interference of mine. Now we'll
just have a little medical talk, Mr. Gibson, and then you and Clare
shall finish your tÉte-ł-tÉte."

They were neither of them quite as desirous of further conversation
together as they had been before the passage out of Lord Cumnor's
letter had been read aloud. Mr. Gibson tried not to think about it,
for he was aware that if he dwelt upon it, he might get to fancy all
sorts of things, as to the conversation which had ended in his offer.
But Lady Cumnor was imperious now, as always.

"Come, no nonsense. I always made my girls go and have tÉte-ł-tÉtes
with the men who were to be their husbands, whether they would or no:
there's a great deal to be talked over before every marriage, and you
two are certainly old enough to be above affectation. Go away with
you."

So there was nothing for it but for them to return to the library;
Mrs. Kirkpatrick pouting a little, and Mr. Gibson feeling more like
his own cool, sarcastic self, by many degrees, than he had done when
last in that room.

She began, half crying,--

"I cannot tell what poor Kirkpatrick would say if he knew what I have
done. He did so dislike the notion of second marriages, poor fellow!"

"Let us hope that he doesn't know, then; or that, if he does, he
is wiser--I mean, that he sees how second marriages may be most
desirable and expedient in some cases."

Altogether, this second tÉte-ł-tÉte, done to command, was not so
satisfactory as the first; and Mr. Gibson was quite alive to the
necessity of proceeding on his round to see his patients before very
much time had elapsed.

"We shall shake down into uniformity before long, I've no doubt,"
said he to himself, as he rode away. "It's hardly to be expected that
our thoughts should run in the same groove all at once. Nor should I
like it," he added. "It would be very flat and stagnant to have only
an echo of one's own opinions from one's wife. Heigho! I must tell
Molly about it: dear little woman, I wonder how she'll take it? It's
done, in a great measure, for her good." And then he lost himself in
recapitulating Mrs. Kirkpatrick's good qualities, and the advantages
to be gained to his daughter from the step he had just taken.

It was too late to go round by Hamley that afternoon. The Towers and
the Towers' round lay just in the opposite direction to Hamley. So it
was the next morning before Mr. Gibson arrived at the Hall, timing
his visit as well as he could so as to have half-an-hour's private
talk with Molly before Mrs. Hamley came down into the drawing-room.
He thought that his daughter would require sympathy after receiving
the intelligence he had to communicate; and he knew there was no one
more fit to give it than Mrs. Hamley.

It was a brilliantly hot summer's morning; men in their shirtsleeves
were in the fields getting in the early harvest of oats; as Mr.
Gibson rode slowly along, he could see them over the tall hedge-rows,
and even hear the soothing measured sound of the fall of the long
swathes, as they were mown. The labourers seemed too hot to talk; the
dog, guarding their coats and cans, lay panting loudly on the other
side of the elm, under which Mr. Gibson stopped for an instant to
survey the scene, and gain a little delay before the interview that
he wished was well over. In another minute he had snapped at himself
for his weakness, and put spurs to his horse. He came up to the Hall
at a good sharp trot; it was earlier than the usual time of his
visits, and no one was expecting him; all the stable-men were in
the fields, but that signified little to Mr. Gibson; he walked his
horse about for five minutes or so before taking him into the stable,
and loosened his girths, examining him with perhaps unnecessary
exactitude. He went into the house by a private door, and made his
way into the drawing-room, half expecting, however, that Molly would
be in the garden. She had been there, but it was too hot and dazzling
now for her to remain out of doors, and she had come in by the open
window of the drawing-room. Oppressed with the heat, she had fallen
asleep in an easy-chair, her bonnet and open book upon her knee, one
arm hanging listlessly down. She looked very soft, and young, and
childlike; and a gush of love sprang into her father's heart as he
gazed at her.

"Molly!" said he, gently, taking the little brown hand that was
hanging down, and holding it in his own. "Molly!"

She opened her eyes, that for one moment had no recognition in them.
Then the light came brilliantly into them and she sprang up, and
threw her arms round his neck, exclaiming,--

"Oh, papa, my dear, dear papa! What made you come while I was asleep?
I lose the pleasure of watching for you."

Mr. Gibson turned a little paler than he had been before. He still
held her hand, and drew her to a seat by him on a sofa, without
speaking. There was no need; she was chattering away.

"I was up so early! It is so charming to be out here in the fresh
morning air. I think that made me sleepy. But isn't it a gloriously
hot day? I wonder if the Italian skies they talk about can be bluer
than that--that little bit you see just between the oaks--there!"

She pulled her hand away, and used both it and the other to turn her
father's head, so that he should exactly see the very bit she meant.
She was rather struck by his unusual silence.

"Have you heard from Miss Eyre, papa? How are they all? And this
fever that is about? Do you know, papa, I don't think you are looking
well? You want me at home to take care of you. How soon may I come
home?"

"Don't I look well? That must be all your fancy, goosey. I feel
uncommonly well; and I ought to look well, for-- I have a piece of
news for you, little woman." (He felt that he was doing his business
very awkwardly, but he was determined to plunge on.) "Can you guess
it?"

"How should I?" said she; but her tone was changed, and she was
evidently uneasy, as with the presage of an instinct.

"Why, you see, my love," said he, again taking her hand, "that you
are in a very awkward position--a girl growing up in such a family
as mine--young men--which was a piece of confounded stupidity on my
part. And I am obliged to be away so much."

"But there is Miss Eyre," said she, sick with the strengthening
indefinite presage of what was to come. "Dear Miss Eyre, I want
nothing but her and you."

"Still there are times like the present when Miss Eyre cannot be with
you; her home is not with us; she has other duties. I've been in
great perplexity for some time; but at last I've taken a step which
will, I hope, make us both happier."

"You're going to be married again," said she, helping him out, with a
quiet dry voice, and gently drawing her hand out of his.

"Yes. To Mrs. Kirkpatrick--you remember her? They call her Clare at
the Towers. You recollect how kind she was to you that day you were
left there?"

She did not answer. She could not tell what words to use. She
was afraid of saying anything, lest the passion of anger,
dislike, indignation--whatever it was that was boiling up in her
breast--should find vent in cries and screams, or worse, in raging
words that could never be forgotten. It was as if the piece of solid
ground on which she stood had broken from the shore, and she was
drifting out to the infinite sea alone.

Mr. Gibson saw that her silence was unnatural, and half-guessed at
the cause of it. But he knew that she must have time to reconcile
herself to the idea, and still believed that it would be for her
eventual happiness. He had, besides, the relief of feeling that the
secret was told, the confidence made, which he had been dreading
for the last twenty-four hours. He went on recapitulating all the
advantages of the marriage; he knew them off by heart now.

"She's a very suitable age for me. I don't know how old she is
exactly, but she must be nearly forty. I shouldn't have wished to
marry any one younger. She's highly respected by Lord and Lady Cumnor
and their family, which is of itself a character. She has very
agreeable and polished manners--of course, from the circles she has
been thrown into--and you and I, goosey, are apt to be a little
brusque, or so; we must brush up our manners now."

No remark from her on this little bit of playfulness. He went on,--

"She has been accustomed to housekeeping--economical housekeeping,
too--for of late years she has had a school at Ashcombe, and has had,
of course, to arrange all things for a large family. And last, but
not least, she has a daughter--about your age, Molly--who, of course,
will come and live with us, and be a nice companion--a sister--for
you."

Still she was silent. At length she said,--

"So I was sent out of the house that all this might be quietly
arranged in my absence?"

Out of the bitterness of her heart she spoke, but she was roused
out of her assumed impassiveness by the effect produced. Her
father started up, and quickly left the room, saying something to
himself--what, she could not hear, though she ran after him, followed
him through dark stone passages, into the glare of the stable-yard,
into the stables--

"Oh, papa, papa--I'm not myself--I don't know what to say about this
hateful--detestable--"

He led his horse out. She did not know if he heard her words. Just as
he mounted, he turned round upon her with a grey grim face--

"I think it's better for both of us, for me to go away now. We
may say things difficult to forget. We are both much agitated. By
to-morrow we shall be more composed; you will have thought it over,
and have seen that the principal--one great motive, I mean--was your
good. You may tell Mrs. Hamley--I meant to have told her myself. I
will come again to-morrow. Good-by, Molly."

For many minutes after he had ridden away--long after the sound of
his horse's hoofs on the round stones of the paved lane, beyond the
home-meadows, had died away--Molly stood there, shading her eyes,
and looking at the empty space of air in which his form had last
appeared. Her very breath seemed suspended; only, two or three times,
after long intervals, she drew a miserable sigh, which was caught up
into a sob. She turned away at last, but could not go into the house,
could not tell Mrs. Hamley, could not forget how her father had
looked and spoken--and left her.

She went out through a side-door--it was the way by which the
gardeners passed when they took the manure into the garden--and the
walk to which it led was concealed from sight as much as possible by
shrubs and evergreens and over-arching trees. No one would know what
became of her--and, with the ingratitude of misery, she added to
herself, no one would care. Mrs. Hamley had her own husband, her own
children, her close home interests--she was very good and kind, but
there was a bitter grief in Molly's heart, with which the stranger
could not intermeddle. She went quickly on to the bourne which she
had fixed for herself--a seat almost surrounded by the drooping
leaves of a weeping-ash--a seat on the long broad terrace walk on
the other side of the wood, that overlooked the pleasant slope of
the meadows beyond. The walk had probably been made to command this
sunny, peaceful landscape, with trees, and a church spire, two or
three red-tiled roofs of old cottages, and a purple bit of rising
ground in the distance; and at some previous date, when there might
have been a large family of Hamleys residing at the Hall, ladies
in hoops, and gentlemen in bag-wigs with swords by their sides,
might have filled up the breadth of the terrace, as they sauntered,
smiling, along. But no one ever cared to saunter there now. It was a
deserted walk. The squire or his sons might cross it in passing to a
little gate that led to the meadow beyond; but no one loitered there.
Molly almost thought that no one knew of the hidden seat under the
ash-tree but herself; for there were not more gardeners employed upon
the grounds than were necessary to keep the kitchen-gardens and such
of the ornamental part as was frequented by the family, or in sight
of the house, in good order.

When she had once got to the seat she broke out with suppressed
passion of grief. She did not care to analyze the sources of her
tears and sobs--her father was going to be married again--her father
was angry with her; she had done very wrong--he had gone away
displeased; she had lost his love; he was going to be married--away
from her--away from his child--his little daughter--forgetting her
own dear, dear mother. So she thought in a tumultuous kind of way,
sobbing till she was wearied out, and had to gain strength by being
quiet for a time, to break forth into her passion of tears afresh.
She had cast herself on the ground--that natural throne for violent
sorrow--and leant up against the old moss-grown seat; sometimes
burying her face in her hands; sometimes clasping them together, as
if by the tight painful grasp of her fingers she could deaden mental
suffering.

She did not see Roger Hamley returning from the meadows, nor hear the
click of the little white gate. He had been out dredging in ponds and
ditches, and had his wet sling-net, with its imprisoned treasures of
nastiness, over his shoulder. He was coming home to lunch, having
always a fine midday appetite, though he pretended to despise the
meal in theory. But he knew that his mother liked his companionship
then; she depended much upon her luncheon, and was seldom downstairs
and visible to her family much before the time. So he overcame his
theory, for the sake of his mother, and had his reward in the hearty
relish with which he kept her company in eating.

He did not see Molly as he crossed the terrace-walk on his way
homewards. He had gone about twenty yards along the small wood-path
at right angles to the terrace, when, looking among the grass and
wild plants under the trees, he spied out one which was rare, one
which he had been long wishing to find in flower, and saw it at last,
with those bright keen eyes of his. Down went his net, skilfully
twisted so as to retain its contents, while it lay amid the herbage,
and he himself went with light and well-planted footsteps in search
of the treasure. He was so great a lover of nature that, without any
thought, but habitually, he always avoided treading unnecessarily on
any plant; who knew what long-sought growth or insect might develop
itself in that which now appeared but insignificant?

His steps led him in the direction of the ash-tree seat, much less
screened from observation on this side than on the terrace. He
stopped; he saw a light-coloured dress on the ground--somebody
half-lying on the seat, so still just then, he wondered if the
person, whoever it was, had fallen ill or fainted. He paused to
watch. In a minute or two the sobs broke out again--the words. It was
Miss Gibson crying out in a broken voice,--

"Oh, papa, papa! if you would but come back!"

For a minute or two he thought it would be kinder to leave her
fancying herself unobserved; he had even made a retrograde step or
two, on tip-toe; but then he heard the miserable sobbing again. It
was farther than his mother could walk, or else, be the sorrow what
it would, she was the natural comforter of this girl, her visitor.
However, whether it was right or wrong, delicate or obtrusive, when
he heard the sad voice talking again, in such tones of uncomforted,
lonely misery, he turned back, and went to the green tent under the
ash-tree. She started up when he came thus close to her; she tried to
check her sobs, and instinctively smoothed her wet tangled hair back
with her hands.

He looked down upon her with grave, kind sympathy, but he did not
know exactly what to say.

"Is it lunch-time?" said she, trying to believe that he did not see
the traces of her tears and the disturbance of her features--that he
had not seen her lying, sobbing her heart out there.

"I don't know. I was going home to lunch. But--you must let me
say it--I couldn't go on when I saw your distress. Has anything
happened?--anything in which I can help you, I mean; for, of course,
I've no right to make the inquiry, if it is any private sorrow, in
which I can be of no use."

She had exhausted herself so much with crying, that she felt as if
she could neither stand nor walk just yet. She sate down on the seat,
and sighed, and turned so pale, he thought she was going to faint.

"Wait a moment," said he,--quite unnecessarily, for she could not
have stirred,--and he was off like a shot to some spring of water
that he knew of in the wood, and in a minute or two he returned with
careful steps, bringing a little in a broad green leaf, turned into
an impromptu cup. Little as it was, it did her good.

"Thank you!" she said: "I can walk back now, in a short time. Don't
stop."

"You must let me," said he: "my mother wouldn't like me to leave you
to come home alone, while you are so faint."

So they remained in silence for a little while; he, breaking off and
examining one or two abnormal leaves of the ash-tree, partly from the
custom of his nature, partly to give her time to recover.

"Papa is going to be married again," said she, at length.

She could not have said why she told him this; an instant before she
spoke, she had no intention of doing so. He dropped the leaf he held
in his hand, turned round, and looked at her. Her poor wistful eyes
were filling with tears as they met his, with a dumb appeal for
sympathy. Her look was much more eloquent than her words. There was
a momentary pause before he replied, and then it was more because he
felt that he must say something than that he was in any doubt as to
the answer to the question he asked.

"You are sorry for it?"

She did not take her eyes away from his, as her quivering lips formed
the word "Yes," though her voice made no sound. He was silent again
now; looking on the ground, kicking softly at a loose pebble with his
foot. His thoughts did not come readily to the surface in the shape
of words; nor was he apt at giving comfort till he saw his way clear
to the real source from which consolation must come. At last he
spoke,--almost as if he was reasoning out the matter with himself.

"It seems as if there might be cases where--setting the question of
love entirely on one side--it must be almost a duty to find some one
to be a substitute for the mother. . . I can believe," said he, in
a different tone of voice, and looking at Molly afresh, "that this
step may be greatly for your father's happiness--it may relieve him
from many cares, and may give him a pleasant companion."

"He had me. You don't know what we were to each other--at least, what
he was to me," she added, humbly.

"Still he must have thought it for the best, or he wouldn't have done
it. He may have thought it the best for your sake even more than for
his own."

"That is what he tried to convince me of."

Roger began kicking the pebble again. He had not got hold of the
right end of the clue. Suddenly he looked up.

"I want to tell you of a girl I know. Her mother died when she was
about sixteen--the eldest of a large family. From that time--all
through the bloom of her youth--she gave herself up to her father,
first as his comforter, afterwards as his companion, friend,
secretary--anything you like. He was a man with a great deal of
business on hand, and often came home only to set to afresh to
preparations for the next day's work. Harriet was always there, ready
to help, to talk, or to be silent. It went on for eight or ten years
in this way; and then her father married again,--a woman not many
years older than Harriet herself. Well--they are just the happiest
set of people I know--you wouldn't have thought it likely, would
you?"

She was listening, but she had no heart to say anything. Yet she was
interested in this little story of Harriet--a girl who had been so
much to her father, more than Molly in this early youth of hers could
have been to Mr. Gibson. "How was it?" she sighed out at last.

"Harriet thought of her father's happiness before she thought of her
own," Roger answered, with something of severe brevity. Molly needed
the bracing. She began to cry again a little.

"If it were for papa's happiness--"

"He must believe that it is. Whatever you fancy, give him a chance.
He cannot have much comfort, I should think, if he sees you fretting
or pining,--you who have been so much to him, as you say. The lady
herself, too--if Harriet's stepmother had been a selfish woman, and
been always clutching after the gratification of her own wishes; but
she was not: she was as anxious for Harriet to be happy as Harriet
was for her father--and your father's future wife may be another of
the same kind, though such people are rare."

"I don't think she is, though," murmured Molly, a waft of
recollection bringing to her mind the details of her day at the
Towers long ago.

Roger did not want to hear Molly's reasons for this doubting speech.
He felt as if he had no right to hear more of Mr. Gibson's family
life, past, present, or to come, than was absolutely necessary for
him, in order that he might comfort and help the crying girl, whom he
had come upon so unexpectedly. And besides, he wanted to go home, and
be with his mother at lunch-time. Yet he could not leave her alone.

"It is right to hope for the best about everybody, and not to expect
the worst. This sounds like a truism, but it has comforted me before
now, and some day you'll find it useful. One has always to try to
think more of others than of oneself, and it is best not to prejudge
people on the bad side. My sermons aren't long, are they? Have they
given you an appetite for lunch? Sermons always make me hungry, I
know."

He appeared to be waiting for her to get up and come along with him,
as indeed he was. But he meant her to perceive that he should not
leave her; so she rose up languidly, too languid to say how much she
should prefer being left alone, if he would only go away without her.
She was very weak, and stumbled over the straggling root of a tree
that projected across the path. He, watchful though silent, saw
this stumble, and putting out his hand held her up from falling. He
still held her hand when the occasion was past; this little physical
failure impressed on his heart how young and helpless she was, and
he yearned to her, remembering the passion of sorrow in which he had
found her, and longing to be of some little tender bit of comfort to
her, before they parted--before their tÉte-ł-tÉte walk was merged in
the general familiarity of the household life. Yet he did not know
what to say.

"You will have thought me hard," he burst out at length, as they
were nearing the drawing-room windows and the garden-door. "I
never can manage to express what I feel--somehow I always fall to
philosophizing--but I am sorry for you. Yes, I am; it's beyond my
power to help you, as far as altering facts goes, but I can feel for
you, in a way which it's best not to talk about, for it can do no
good. Remember how sorry I am for you! I shall often be thinking of
you, though I daresay it's best not to talk about it again."

She said, "I know you are sorry," under her breath, and then she
broke away, and ran indoors, and upstairs to the solitude of her own
room. He went straight to his mother, who was sitting before the
untasted luncheon, as much annoyed by the mysterious unpunctuality
of her visitor as she was capable of being with anything; for she
had heard that Mr. Gibson had been, and was gone, and she could not
discover if he had left any message for her; and her anxiety about
her own health, which some people esteemed hypochondriacal, always
made her particularly craving for the wisdom which might fall from
her doctor's lips.

"Where have you been, Roger? Where is Molly?--Miss Gibson, I mean,"
for she was careful to keep up a barrier of forms between the young
man and young woman who were thrown together in the same household.

"I've been out dredging. (By the way, I left my net on the terrace
walk.) I found Miss Gibson sitting there, crying as if her heart
would break. Her father is going to be married again."

"Married again! You don't say so."

"Yes, he is; and she takes it very hardly, poor girl. Mother, I think
if you could send some one to her with a glass of wine, a cup of tea,
or something of that sort--she was very nearly fainting--"

"I'll go to her myself, poor child," said Mrs. Hamley, rising.

"Indeed you must not," said he, laying his hand upon her arm. "We
have kept you waiting already too long; you are looking quite pale.
Hammond can take it," he continued, ringing the bell. She sate down
again, almost stunned with surprise.

"Whom is he going to marry?"

"I don't know. I didn't ask, and she didn't tell me."

"That's so like a man. Why, half the character of the affair lies in
the question of who it is that he is going to marry."

"I daresay I ought to have asked. But somehow I'm not a good one
on such occasions. I was as sorry as could be for her, and yet I
couldn't tell what to say."

"What did you say?"

"I gave her the best advice in my power."

"Advice! you ought to have comforted her. Poor little Molly!"

"I think that if advice is good it's the best comfort."

"That depends on what you mean by advice. Hush! here she is."

To their surprise, Molly came in, trying hard to look as usual. She
had bathed her eyes, and arranged her hair; and was making a great
struggle to keep from crying, and to bring her voice into order.
She was unwilling to distress Mrs. Hamley by the sight of pain and
suffering. She did not know that she was following Roger's injunction
to think more of others than of herself--but so she was. Mrs. Hamley
was not sure if it was wise in her to begin on the piece of news she
had just heard from her son; but she was too full of it herself to
talk of anything else. "So I hear your father is going to be married,
my dear? May I ask whom it is to?"

"Mrs. Kirkpatrick. I think she was governess a long time ago at the
Countess of Cumnor's. She stays with them a great deal, and they call
her Clare, and I believe they are very fond of her." Molly tried to
speak of her future stepmother in the most favourable manner she knew
how.

"I think I've heard of her. Then she's not very young? That's as it
should be. A widow too. Has she any family?"

"One girl, I believe. But I know so little about her!"

Molly was very near crying again.

"Never mind, my dear. That will all come in good time. Roger, you've
hardly eaten anything; where are you going?"

"To fetch my dredging-net. It's full of things I don't want to lose.
Besides, I never eat much, as a general thing." The truth was partly
told, not all. He thought he had better leave the other two alone.
His mother had such sweet power of sympathy, that she would draw the
sting out of the girl's heart when she had her alone. As soon as he
was gone, Molly lifted up her poor swelled eyes, and, looking at Mrs.
Hamley, she said,--"He was so good to me. I mean to try and remember
all he said."

"I'm glad to hear it, love; very glad. From what he told me, I was
afraid he had been giving you a little lecture. He has a good heart,
but he isn't so tender in his manner as Osborne. Roger is a little
rough sometimes."

"Then I like roughness. It did me good. It made me feel how
badly--oh, Mrs. Hamley, I did behave so badly to papa this morning!"

She rose up and threw herself into Mrs. Hamley's arms, and sobbed
upon her breast. Her sorrow was not now for the fact that her father
was going to be married again, but for her own ill-behaviour.

If Roger was not tender in words, he was in deeds. Unreasonable and
possibly exaggerated as Molly's grief had appeared to him, it was
real suffering to her; and he took some pains to lighten it, in his
own way, which was characteristic enough. That evening he adjusted
his microscope, and put the treasures he had collected in his
morning's ramble on a little table; and then he asked his mother to
come and admire. Of course Molly came too, and this was what he had
intended. He tried to interest her in his pursuit, cherished her
first little morsel of curiosity, and nursed it into a very proper
desire for further information. Then he brought out books on the
subject, and translated the slightly pompous and technical language
into homely every-day speech. Molly had come down to dinner,
wondering how the long hours till bedtime would ever pass away:
hours during which she must not speak on the one thing that would
be occupying her mind to the exclusion of all others; for she was
afraid that already she had wearied Mrs. Hamley with it during their
afternoon tÉte-ł-tÉte. But prayers and bedtime came long before she
expected; she had been refreshed by a new current of thought, and she
was very thankful to Roger. And now there was to-morrow to come, and
a confession of penitence to be made to her father.

But Mr. Gibson did not want speech or words. He was not fond of
expressions of feeling at any time, and perhaps, too, he felt that
the less said the better on a subject about which it was evident that
his daughter and he were not thoroughly and impulsively in harmony.
He read her repentance in her eyes; he saw how much she had suffered;
and he had a sharp pang at his heart in consequence. And he stopped
her from speaking out her regret at her behaviour the day before, by
a "There, there, that will do. I know all you want to say. I know my
little Molly--my silly little goosey--better than she knows herself.
I've brought you an invitation. Lady Cumnor wants you to go and spend
next Thursday at the Towers!"

"Do you wish me to go?" said she, her heart sinking.

"I wish you and Hyacinth to become better acquainted--to learn to
love each other."

"Hyacinth!" said Molly, entirely bewildered.

"Yes; Hyacinth! It's the silliest name I ever heard of; but it's
hers, and I must call her by it. I can't bear Clare, which is
what my lady and all the family at the Towers call her; and 'Mrs.
Kirkpatrick' is formal and nonsensical too, as she'll change her name
so soon."

"When, papa?" asked Molly, feeling as if she were living in a
strange, unknown world.

"Not till after Michaelmas." And then, continuing on his own
thoughts, he added, "And the worst is, she's gone and perpetuated her
own affected name by having her daughter called after her. Cynthia!
One thinks of the moon, and the man in the moon with his bundle of
faggots. I'm thankful you're plain Molly, child."

"How old is she--Cynthia, I mean?"

"Ay, get accustomed to the name. I should think Cynthia Kirkpatrick
was about as old as you are. She's at school in France, picking up
airs and graces. She's to come home for the wedding, so you'll be
able to get acquainted with her then; though, I think, she's to go
back again for another half-year or so."




CHAPTER XI.

MAKING FRIENDSHIP.


Mr. Gibson believed that Cynthia Kirkpatrick was to return to England
to be present at her mother's wedding; but Mrs. Kirkpatrick had
no such intention. She was not what is commonly called a woman
of determination; but somehow what she disliked she avoided, and
what she liked she tried to do, or to have. So although in the
conversation, which she had already led to, as to the when and the
how she was to be married, she had listened quietly to Mr. Gibson's
proposal that Molly and Cynthia should be the two bridesmaids, still
she had felt how disagreeable it would be to her to have her young
daughter flashing out her beauty by the side of the faded bride, her
mother; and as the further arrangements for the wedding became more
definite, she saw further reasons in her own mind for Cynthia's
remaining quietly at her school at Boulogne.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick had gone to bed that first night of her engagement
to Mr. Gibson, fully anticipating a speedy marriage. She looked to
it as a release from the thraldom of keeping school--keeping an
unprofitable school, with barely pupils enough to pay for house
rent and taxes, food, washing, and the requisite masters. She saw
no reason for ever going back to Ashcombe, except to wind up her
affairs, and to pack up her clothes. She hoped that Mr. Gibson's
ardour would be such that he would press on the marriage, and urge
her never to resume her school drudgery, but to relinquish it now and
for ever. She even made up a very pretty, very passionate speech for
him in her own mind; quite sufficiently strong to prevail upon her,
and to overthrow the scruples which she felt she ought to have, at
telling the parents of her pupils that she did not intend to resume
school, and that they must find another place of education for their
daughters, in the last week but one of the midsummer holidays.

It was rather like a douche of cold water on Mrs. Kirkpatrick's
plans, when the next morning at breakfast Lady Cumnor began to decide
upon the arrangements and duties of the two middle-aged lovers.

"Of course you can't give up your school all at once, Clare. The
wedding can't be before Christmas, but that will do very well. We
shall all be down at the Towers; and it will be a nice amusement for
the children to go over to Ashcombe, and see you married."

"I think--I am afraid--I don't believe Mr. Gibson will like waiting
so long; men are so impatient under these circumstances."

"Oh, nonsense! Lord Cumnor has recommended you to his tenants, and
I'm sure he wouldn't like them to be put to any inconvenience. Mr.
Gibson will see that in a moment. He's a man of sense, or else he
wouldn't be our family doctor. Now, what are you going to do about
your little girl? Have you fixed yet?"

"No. Yesterday there seemed so little time, and when one is agitated
it is so difficult to think of anything. Cynthia is nearly eighteen,
old enough to go out as a governess, if he wishes it, but I don't
think he will. He is so generous and kind."

"Well! I must give you time to settle some of your affairs to-day.
Don't waste it in sentiment, you're too old for that. Come to a clear
understanding with each other; it will be for your happiness in the
long run."

So they did come to a clear understanding about one or two things.
To Mrs. Kirkpatrick's dismay, she found that Mr. Gibson had no more
idea than Lady Cumnor of her breaking faith with the parents of her
pupils. Though he really was at a serious loss as to what was to
become of Molly till she could be under the protection of his new
wife at her own home, and though his domestic worries teased him more
and more every day, he was too honourable to think of persuading Mrs.
Kirkpatrick to give up school a week sooner than was right for his
sake. He did not even perceive how easy the task of persuasion would
be; with all her winning wiles she could scarcely lead him to feel
impatience for the wedding to take place at Michaelmas.

"I can hardly tell you what a comfort and relief it will be to me,
Hyacinth, when you are once my wife--the mistress of my home--poor
little Molly's mother and protector; but I wouldn't interfere with
your previous engagements for the world. It wouldn't be right."

"Thank you, my own love. How good you are! So many men would think
only of their own wishes and interests! I'm sure the parents of
my dear pupils will admire you--will be quite surprised at your
consideration for their interests."

"Don't tell them, then. I hate being admired. Why shouldn't you say
it is your wish to keep on your school till they've had time to look
out for another?"

"Because it isn't," said she, daring all. "I long to be making you
happy; I want to make your home a place of rest and comfort to you;
and I do so wish to cherish your sweet Molly, as I hope to do, when
I come to be her mother. I can't take virtue to myself which doesn't
belong to me. If I have to speak for myself, I shall say, 'Good
people, find a school for your daughters by Michaelmas,--for after
that time I must go and make the happiness of others.' I can't bear
to think of your long rides in November--coming home wet at night
with no one to take care of you. Oh! if you leave it to me, I shall
advise the parents to take their daughters away from the care of one
whose heart will be absent. Though I couldn't consent to any time
before Michaelmas--that wouldn't be fair or right, and I'm sure you
wouldn't urge me--you are too good."

"Well, if you think that they will consider we have acted uprightly
by them, let it be Michaelmas with all my heart. What does Lady
Cumnor say?"

"Oh! I told her I was afraid you wouldn't like waiting, because of
your difficulties with your servants, and because of Molly--it would
be so desirable to enter on the new relationship with her as soon as
possible."

"To be sure; so it would. Poor child! I'm afraid the intelligence of
my engagement has rather startled her."

"Cynthia will feel it deeply, too," said Mrs. Kirkpatrick, unwilling
to let her daughter be behind Mr. Gibson's in sensibility and
affection.

"We will have her over to the wedding! She and Molly shall be
bridesmaids," said Mr. Gibson, in the unguarded warmth of his heart.

This plan did not quite suit Mrs. Kirkpatrick: but she thought it
best not to oppose it, until she had a presentable excuse to give,
and perhaps also some reason would naturally arise out of future
circumstances; so at this time she only smiled, and softly pressed
the hand she held in hers.

It is a question whether Mrs. Kirkpatrick or Molly wished the most
for the day to be over which they were to spend together at the
Towers. Mrs. Kirkpatrick was rather weary of girls as a class. All
the trials of her life were connected with girls in some way. She was
very young when she first became a governess, and had been worsted
in her struggles with her pupils, in the first place she ever went
to. Her elegance of appearance and manner, and her accomplishments,
more than her character and acquirements, had rendered it easier
for her than for most to obtain good "situations;" and she had been
absolutely petted in some; but still she was constantly encountering
naughty or stubborn, or over-conscientious, or severe-judging, or
curious and observant girls. And again, before Cynthia was born, she
had longed for a boy, thinking it possible that if some three or
four intervening relations died, he might come to be a baronet; and
instead of a son, lo and behold it was a daughter! Nevertheless, with
all her dislike to girls in the abstract as "the plagues of her life"
(and her aversion was not diminished by the fact of her having kept
a school for "young ladies" at Ashcombe), she really meant to be as
kind as she could be to her new step-daughter, whom she remembered
principally as a black-haired, sleepy child, in whose eyes she had
read admiration of herself. Mrs. Kirkpatrick accepted Mr. Gibson
principally because she was tired of the struggle of earning her own
livelihood; but she liked him personally--nay, she even loved him in
her torpid way, and she intended to be good to his daughter, though
she felt as if it would have been easier for her to have been good to
his son.

Molly was bracing herself up in her way too. "I will be like Harriet.
I will think of others. I won't think of myself," she kept repeating
all the way to the Towers. But there was no selfishness in wishing
that the day was come to an end, and that she did very heartily. Mrs.
Hamley sent her thither in the carriage, which was to wait and bring
her back at night. Mrs. Hamley wanted Molly to make a favourable
impression, and she sent for her to come and show herself before she
set out.

"Don't put on your silk gown--your white muslin will look the nicest,
my dear."

"Not my silk? it is quite new! I had it to come here."

"Still, I think your white muslin suits you the best." "Anything but
that horrid plaid silk" was the thought in Mrs. Hamley's mind; and,
thanks to her, Molly set off for the Towers, looking a little quaint,
it is true, but thoroughly lady-like, if she was old-fashioned. Her
father was to meet her there; but he had been detained, and she had
to face Mrs. Kirkpatrick by herself, the recollection of her last
day of misery at the Towers fresh in her mind as if it had been
yesterday. Mrs. Kirkpatrick was as caressing as could be. She held
Molly's hand in hers, as they sate together in the library, after the
first salutations were over. She kept stroking it from time to time,
and purring out inarticulate sounds of loving satisfaction, as she
gazed in the blushing face.


[Illustration: THE NEW MAMMA.]


"What eyes! so like your dear father's! How we shall love each
other--shan't we, darling? For his sake!"

"I'll try," said Molly, bravely; and then she could not finish her
sentence.

"And you've just got the same beautiful black curling hair!" said
Mrs. Kirkpatrick, softly lifting one of Molly's curls from off her
white temple.

"Papa's hair is growing grey," said Molly.

"Is it? I never see it. I never shall see it. He will always be to me
the handsomest of men."

Mr. Gibson was really a very handsome man, and Molly was pleased with
the compliment; but she could not help saying,--

"Still he will grow old, and his hair will grow grey. I think he will
be just as handsome, but it won't be as a young man."

"Ah! that's just it, love. He'll always be handsome; some people
always are. And he is so fond of you, dear." Molly's colour flashed
into her face. She did not want an assurance of her own father's love
from this strange woman. She could not help being angry; all she
could do was to keep silent. "You don't know how he speaks of you;
'his little treasure,' as he calls you. I'm almost jealous
sometimes."

Molly took her hand away, and her heart began to harden; these
speeches were so discordant to her. But she set her teeth together,
and "tried to be good."

"We must make him so happy. I'm afraid he has had a great deal to
annoy him at home; but we will do away with all that now. You must
tell me," seeing the cloud in Molly's eyes, "what he likes and
dislikes, for of course you will know."

Molly's face cleared a little; of course she did know. She had not
watched and loved him so long without believing that she understood
him better than any one else: though how he had come to like Mrs.
Kirkpatrick enough to wish to marry her, was an unsolved problem that
she unconsciously put aside as inexplicable. Mrs. Kirkpatrick went
on,--"All men have their fancies and antipathies, even the wisest.
I have known some gentlemen annoyed beyond measure by the merest
trifles; leaving a door open, or spilling tea in their saucers, or
a shawl crookedly put on. Why," continued she, lowering her voice,
"I know of a house to which Lord Hollingford will never be asked
again because he didn't wipe his shoes on both the mats in the hall!
Now you must tell me what your dear father dislikes most in these
fanciful ways, and I shall take care to avoid it. You must be my
little friend and helper in pleasing him. It will be such a pleasure
to me to attend to his slightest fancies. About my dress, too--what
colours does he like best? I want to do everything in my power with a
view to his approval."

Molly was gratified by all this, and began to think that really,
after all, perhaps her father had done well for himself; and that
if she could help towards his new happiness, she ought to do it. So
she tried very conscientiously to think over Mr. Gibson's wishes and
ways; to ponder over what annoyed him the most in his household.

"I think," said she, "papa isn't particular about many things; but I
think our not having the dinner quite punctual--quite ready for him
when he comes in, fidgets him more than anything. You see, he has
often had a long ride, and there is another long ride to come, and he
has only half-an-hour--sometimes only a quarter--to eat his dinner
in."

"Thank you, my own love. Punctuality! Yes; it's a great thing in a
household. It's what I've had to enforce with my young ladies at
Ashcombe. No wonder poor dear Mr. Gibson has been displeased at his
dinner not being ready, and he so hard-worked!"

"Papa doesn't care what he has, if it's only ready. He would take
bread-and-cheese, if cook would only send it in instead of dinner."

"Bread-and-cheese! Does Mr. Gibson eat cheese?"

"Yes; he's very fond of it," said Molly, innocently. "I've known
him eat toasted cheese when he has been too tired to fancy anything
else."

"Oh! but, my dear, we must change all that. I shouldn't like to
think of your father eating cheese; it's such a strong-smelling,
coarse kind of thing. We must get him a cook who can toss him up an
omelette, or something elegant. Cheese is only fit for the kitchen."

"Papa is very fond of it," persevered Molly.

"Oh! but we will cure him of that. I couldn't bear the smell of
cheese; and I'm sure he would be sorry to annoy me."

Molly was silent; it did not do, she found, to be too minute in
telling about her father's likes or dislikes. She had better leave
them for Mrs. Kirkpatrick to find out for herself. It was an awkward
pause; each was trying to find something agreeable to say. Molly
spoke at length. "Please! I should so like to know something about
Cynthia--your daughter."

"Yes, call her Cynthia. It's a pretty name, isn't it? Cynthia
Kirkpatrick. Not so pretty, though, as my old name, Hyacinth Clare.
People used to say it suited me so well. I must show you an acrostic
that a gentleman--he was a lieutenant in the 53rd--made upon it. Oh!
we shall have a great deal to say to each other, I foresee!"

"But about Cynthia?"

"Oh, yes! about dear Cynthia. What do you want to know, my dear?"

"Papa said she was to live with us! When will she come?"

"Oh, was it not sweet of your kind father? I thought of nothing
else but Cynthia's going out as a governess when she had completed
her education; she has been brought up for it, and has had great
advantages. But good dear Mr. Gibson wouldn't hear of it. He said
yesterday that she must come and live with us when she left school."

"When will she leave school?"

"She went for two years. I don't think I must let her leave before
next summer. She teaches English as well as learning French. Next
summer she shall come home, and then shan't we be a happy little
quartette?"

"I hope so," said Molly. "But she is to come to the wedding, isn't
she?" she went on timidly, not knowing how far Mrs. Kirkpatrick would
like the allusion to her marriage.

"Your father has begged for her to come; but we must think about it a
little more before quite fixing it. The journey is a great expense!"

"Is she like you? I do so want to see her."

"She is very handsome, people say. In the bright-coloured
style,--perhaps something like what I was. But I like the dark-haired
foreign kind of beauty best--just now," touching Molly's hair, and
looking at her with an expression of sentimental remembrance.

"Does Cynthia--is she very clever and accomplished?" asked Molly, a
little afraid lest the answer should remove Miss Kirkpatrick at too
great a distance from her.

"She ought to be; I've paid ever so much money to have her taught by
the best masters. But you will see her before long, and I'm afraid we
must go now to Lady Cumnor. It has been very charming having you all
to myself, but I know Lady Cumnor will be expecting us now, and she
was very curious to see you,--my future daughter, as she calls you."

Molly followed Mrs. Kirkpatrick into the morning-room, where Lady
Cumnor was sitting--a little annoyed, because, having completed her
toilette earlier than usual, Clare had not been aware by instinct
of the fact, and so had not brought Molly Gibson for inspection a
quarter of an hour before. Every small occurrence is an event in
the day of a convalescent invalid, and a little while ago Molly
would have met with patronizing appreciation, where now she had to
encounter criticism. Of Lady Cumnor's character as an individual she
knew nothing; she only knew she was going to see and be seen by a
live countess; nay, more, by "_the_ countess" of Hollingford.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick led her into Lady Cumnor's presence by the hand, and
in presenting her, said,--"My dear little daughter, Lady Cumnor!"

"Now, Clare, don't let me have nonsense. She is not your daughter
yet, and may never be,--I believe that one-third of the engagements
I have heard of, have never come to marriages. Miss Gibson, I am very
glad to see you, for your father's sake; when I know you better, I
hope it will be for your own."

Molly very heartily hoped that she might never be known any better
by the stern-looking lady who sate so upright in the easy chair,
prepared for lounging, and which therefore gave all the more effect
to the stiff attitude. Lady Cumnor luckily took Molly's silence for
acquiescent humility, and went on speaking after a further little
pause of inspection.

"Yes, yes, I like her looks, Clare. You may make something of her.
It will be a great advantage to you, my dear, to have a lady who has
trained up several young people of quality always about you just at
the time when you are growing up. I'll tell you what, Clare!"--a
sudden thought striking her,--"you and she must become better
acquainted--you know nothing of each other at present; you are not
to be married till Christmas, and what could be better than that
she should go back with you to Ashcombe! She would be with you
constantly, and have the advantage of the companionship of your young
people, which would be a good thing for an only child! It's a capital
plan; I'm very glad I thought of it!"

Now it would be difficult to say which of Lady Cumnor's two hearers
was the most dismayed at the idea which had taken possession of
her. Mrs. Kirkpatrick had no fancy for being encumbered with a
step-daughter before her time. If Molly came to be an inmate of her
house, farewell to many little background economies, and a still
more serious farewell to many little indulgences, that were innocent
enough in themselves, but which Mrs. Kirkpatrick's former life
had caused her to look upon as sins to be concealed: the dirty
dog's-eared delightful novel from the Ashcombe circulating library,
the leaves of which she turned over with a pair of scissors; the
lounging-chair which she had for use at her own home, straight and
upright as she sate now in Lady Cumnor's presence; the dainty morsel,
savoury and small, to which she treated herself for her own solitary
supper,--all these and many other similarly pleasant things would
have to be foregone if Molly came to be her pupil, parlour-boarder,
or visitor, as Lady Cumnor was planning. One--two things Clare was
instinctively resolved upon: to be married at Michaelmas, and not
to have Molly at Ashcombe. But she smiled as sweetly as if the plan
proposed was the most charming project in the world, while all the
time her poor brains were beating about in every bush for the reasons
or excuses of which she should make use at some future time. Molly,
however, saved her all this trouble. It was a question which of the
three was the most surprised by the words which burst out of her
lips. She did not mean to speak, but her heart was very full, and
almost before she was aware of her thought she heard herself
saying,--

"I don't think it would be nice at all. I mean, my lady, that I
should dislike it very much; it would be taking me away from papa
just these very few last months. I will like you," she went on,
her eyes full of tears; and, turning to Mrs. Kirkpatrick, she put
her hand into her future stepmother's with the prettiest and most
trustful action. "I will try hard to love you, and to do all I can
to make you happy; but you must not take me away from papa just this
very last bit of time that I shall have him."

Mrs. Kirkpatrick fondled the hand thus placed in hers, and was
grateful to the girl for her outspoken opposition to Lady Cumnor's
plan. Clare was, however, exceedingly unwilling to back up Molly
by any words of her own until Lady Cumnor had spoken and given the
cue. But there was something in Molly's little speech, or in her
straightforward manner, that amused instead of irritating Lady Cumnor
in her present mood. Perhaps she was tired of the silkiness with
which she had been shut up for so many days.

She put up her glasses, and looked at them both before speaking. Then
she said--"Upon my word, young lady! Why, Clare, you've got your work
before you! Not but what there is a good deal of truth in what she
says. It must be very disagreeable to a girl of her age to have a
stepmother coming in between her father and herself, whatever may be
the advantages to her in the long run."

Molly almost felt as if she could make a friend of the stiff old
countess, for her clearness of sight as to the plan proposed being
a trial; but she was afraid, in her new-born desire of thinking for
others, of Mrs. Kirkpatrick being hurt. She need not have feared as
far as outward signs went, for the smile was still on that lady's
pretty rosy lips, and the soft fondling of her hand never stopped.
Lady Cumnor was more interested in Molly the more she looked at her;
and her gaze was pretty steady through her gold-rimmed eye-glasses.
She began a sort of catechism; a string of very straightforward
questions, such as any lady under the rank of countess might have
scrupled to ask, but which were not unkindly meant.

"You are sixteen, are you not?"

"No; I am seventeen. My birthday was three weeks ago."

"Very much the same thing, I should think. Have you ever been to
school?"

"No, never! Miss Eyre has taught me everything I know."

"Umph! Miss Eyre was your governess, I suppose? I should not have
thought your father could have afforded to keep a governess. But of
course he must know his own affairs best."

"Certainly, my lady," replied Molly, a little touchy as to any
reflections on her father's wisdom.

"You say 'certainly!' as if it was a matter of course that every
one should know their own affairs best. You are very young, Miss
Gibson--very. You'll know better before you come to my age. And I
suppose you've been taught music, and the use of globes, and French,
and all the usual accomplishments, since you have had a governess? I
never heard of such nonsense!" she went on, lashing herself up. "An
only daughter! If there had been half-a-dozen, there might have been
some sense in it."

Molly did not speak, but it was by a strong effort that she kept
silence. Mrs. Kirkpatrick fondled her hand more perseveringly than
ever, hoping thus to express a sufficient amount of sympathy to
prevent her from saying anything injudicious. But the caress had
become wearisome to Molly, and only irritated her nerves. She took
her hand out of Mrs. Kirkpatrick's, with a slight manifestation of
impatience.

It was, perhaps, fortunate for the general peace that just at this
moment Mr. Gibson was announced. It is odd enough to see how the
entrance of a person of the opposite sex into an assemblage of either
men or women calms down the little discordances and the disturbance
of mood. It was the case now; at Mr. Gibson's entrance my lady took
off her glasses, and smoothed her brow; Mrs. Kirkpatrick managed
to get up a very becoming blush, and as for Molly, her face glowed
with delight, and the white teeth and pretty dimples came out like
sunlight on a landscape.

Of course, after the first greeting, my lady had to have a private
interview with her doctor; and Molly and her future stepmother
wandered about in the gardens with their arms round each other's
waists, or hand in hand, like two babes in the wood; Mrs. Kirkpatrick
active in such endearments, Molly passive, and feeling within herself
very shy and strange; for she had that particular kind of shy modesty
which makes any one uncomfortable at receiving caresses from a person
towards whom the heart does not go forth with an impulsive welcome.

Then came the early dinner; Lady Cumnor having hers in the quiet of
her own room, to which she was still a prisoner. Once or twice during
the meal, the idea crossed Molly's mind that her father disliked his
position as a middle-aged lover being made so evident to the men in
waiting as it was by Mrs. Kirkpatrick's affectionate speeches and
innuendos. He tried to banish every tint of pink sentimentalism from
the conversation, and to confine it to matter of fact; and when Mrs.
Kirkpatrick would persevere in referring to such things as had a
bearing on the future relationship of the parties, he insisted upon
viewing them in the most matter-of-fact way; and this continued even
after the men had left the room. An old rhyme Molly had heard Betty
use, would keep running in her head and making her uneasy,--

   Two is company,
   Three is trumpery.

But where could she go to in that strange house? What ought she to
do? She was roused from this fit of wonder and abstraction by her
father's saying--"What do you think of this plan of Lady Cumnor's?
She says she was advising you to have Molly as a visitor at Ashcombe
until we are married."

Mrs. Kirkpatrick's countenance fell. If only Molly would be so good
as to testify again, as she had done before Lady Cumnor! But if the
proposal was made by her father, it would come to his daughter from
a different quarter than it had done from a strange lady, be she
ever so great. Molly did not say anything; she only looked pale, and
wistful, and anxious. Mrs. Kirkpatrick had to speak for herself.

"It would be a charming plan, only--Well! we know why we would rather
not have it, don't we, love? And we won't tell papa, for fear of
making him vain. No! I think I must leave her with you, dear Mr.
Gibson, to have you all to herself for these last few weeks. It would
be cruel to take her away."

"But you know, my dear, I told you of the reason why it does not do
to have Molly at home just at present," said Mr. Gibson, eagerly. For
the more he knew of his future wife, the more he felt it necessary
to remember that, with all her foibles, she would be able to stand
between Molly and any such adventures as that which had occurred
lately with Mr. Coxe; so that one of the good reasons for the step he
had taken was always present to him, while it had slipped off the
smooth surface of Mrs. Kirkpatrick's mirror-like mind without leaving
any impression. She now recalled it, on seeing Mr. Gibson's anxious
face.

But what were Molly's feelings at these last words of her father's?
She had been sent from home for some reason, kept a secret from her,
but told to this strange woman. Was there to be perfect confidence
between these two, and she to be for ever shut out? Was she, and what
concerned her--though how she did not know--to be discussed between
them for the future, and she to be kept in the dark? A bitter pang
of jealousy made her heart-sick. She might as well go to Ashcombe,
or anywhere else, now. Thinking more of others' happiness than
of her own was very fine; but did it not mean giving up her very
individuality, quenching all the warm love, the true desires, that
made her herself? Yet in this deadness lay her only comfort; or so it
seemed. Wandering in such mazes, she hardly knew how the conversation
went on; a third was indeed "trumpery," where there was entire
confidence between the two who were company, from which the other was
shut out. She was positively unhappy, and her father did not appear
to see it; he was absorbed with his new plans and his new wife that
was to be. But he did notice it; and was truly sorry for his little
girl: only he thought that there was a greater chance for the future
harmony of the household, if he did not lead Molly to define her
present feelings by putting them into words. It was his general plan
to repress emotion by not showing the sympathy he felt. Yet, when he
had to leave, he took Molly's hand in his, and held it there, in such
a different manner to that in which Mrs. Kirkpatrick had done; and
his voice softened to his child as he bade her good-by, and added the
words (most unusual to him), "God bless you, child!"

Molly had held up all the day bravely; she had not shown anger, or
repugnance, or annoyance, or regret; but when once more by herself in
the Hamley carriage, she burst into a passion of tears, and cried her
fill till she reached the village of Hamley. Then she tried in vain
to smooth her face into smiles, and do away with the other signs of
her grief. She only hoped she could run upstairs to her own room
without notice, and bathe her eyes in cold water before she was seen.
But at the Hall-door she was caught by the squire and Roger coming in
from an after-dinner stroll in the garden, and hospitably anxious to
help her to alight. Roger saw the state of things in an instant, and
saying,--

"My mother has been looking for you to come back for this last hour,"
he led the way to the drawing-room. But Mrs. Hamley was not there;
the Squire had stopped to speak to the coachman about one of the
horses; they two were alone. Roger said,--

"I'm afraid you've had a very trying day. I have thought of you
several times, for I know how awkward these new relations are."

"Thank you," said she, her lips trembling, and on the point of crying
again. "I did try to remember what you said, and to think more of
others, but it is so difficult sometimes; you know it is, don't you?"

"Yes," said he, gravely. He was gratified by her simple confession
of having borne his words of advice in mind, and tried to act up to
them. He was but a very young man, and he was honestly flattered;
perhaps this led him on to offer more advice, and this time it was
evidently mingled with sympathy. He did not want to draw out her
confidence, which he felt might very easily be done with such a
simple girl; but he wished to help her by giving her a few of the
principles on which he had learnt to rely. "It is difficult," he went
on, "but by-and-by you will be so much happier for it."

"No, I shan't!" said Molly, shaking her head. "It will be very dull
when I shall have killed myself, as it were, and live only in trying
to do, and to be, as other people like. I don't see any end to it.
I might as well never have lived. And as for the happiness you speak
of, I shall never be happy again."

There was an unconscious depth in what she said, that Roger did not
know how to answer at the moment; it was easier to address himself
to the assertion of the girl of seventeen, that she should never be
happy again.

"Nonsense: perhaps in ten years' time you will be looking back on
this trial as a very light one--who knows?"

"I daresay it seems foolish; perhaps all our earthly trials will
appear foolish to us after a while; perhaps they seem so now to
angels. But we are ourselves, you know, and this is _now_, not some
time to come, a long, long way off. And we are not angels, to be
comforted by seeing the ends for which everything is sent."

She had never spoken so long a sentence to him before; and when she
had said it, though she did not take her eyes away from his, as they
stood steadily looking at each other, she blushed a little; she could
not have told why. Nor did he tell himself why a sudden pleasure came
over him as he gazed at her simple expressive face--and for a moment
lost the sense of what she was saying, in the sensation of pity for
her sad earnestness. In an instant more he was himself again. Only
it is pleasant to the wisest, most reasonable youth of one or two
and twenty to find himself looked up to as a Mentor by a girl of
seventeen.

"I know, I understand. Yes: it is _now_ we have to do with. Don't let
us go into metaphysics." Molly opened her eyes wide at this. Had she
been talking metaphysics without knowing it? "One looks forward to
a mass of trials, which will only have to be encountered one by one,
little by little. Oh, here is my mother! she will tell you better
than I can."

And the _tÉte-ł-tÉte_ was merged in a trio. Mrs. Hamley lay down; she
had not been well all day--she had missed Molly, she said,--and now
she wanted to hear of all the adventures that had occurred to the
girl at the Towers. Molly sate on a stool close to the head of the
sofa, and Roger, though at first he took up a book and tried to read
that he might be no restraint, soon found his reading all a pretence:
it was so interesting to listen to Molly's little narrative, and,
besides, if he could give her any help in her time of need, was it
not his duty to make himself acquainted with all the circumstances of
her case?

And so they went on during all the remaining time of Molly's stay
at Hamley. Mrs. Hamley sympathized, and liked to hear details; as
the French say, her sympathy was given _en dÄtail_, the Squire's
_en gros_. He was very sorry for her evident grief, and almost felt
guilty, as if he had had a share in bringing it about, by the mention
he had made of the possibility of Mr. Gibson's marrying again, when
first Molly came on her visit to them. He said to his wife more than
once,--

"'Pon my word, now, I wish I'd never spoken those unlucky words that
first day at dinner. Do you remember how she took them up? It was
like a prophecy of what was to come, now, wasn't it? And she looked
pale from that day, and I don't think she has ever fairly enjoyed her
food since. I must take more care what I say for the future. Not but
what Gibson is doing the very best thing, both for himself and her,
that he can do. I told him so only yesterday. But I'm very sorry for
the little girl, though. I wish I'd never spoken about it, that I do!
but it was like a prophecy, wasn't it?"

Roger tried hard to find out a reasonable and right method of
comfort, for he, too, in his way, was sorry for the girl, who bravely
struggled to be cheerful, in spite of her own private grief, for his
mother's sake. He felt as if high principle and noble precept ought
to perform an immediate work. But they do not, for there is always
the unknown quantity of individual experience and feeling, which
offer a tacit resistance, the amount incalculable by another, to all
good counsel and high decree. But the bond between the Mentor and his
Telemachus strengthened every day. He endeavoured to lead her out
of morbid thought into interest in other than personal things; and,
naturally enough, his own objects of interest came readiest to hand.
She felt that he did her good, she did not know why or how; but after
a talk with him, she always fancied that she had got the clue to
goodness and peace, whatever befell.




CHAPTER XII.

PREPARING FOR THE WEDDING.


[Illustration (untitled)]

Meanwhile the love-affairs between the middle-aged couple were
prospering well, after a fashion; after the fashion that they liked
best, although it might probably have appeared dull and prosaic to
younger people. Lord Cumnor had come down in great glee at the news
he had heard from his wife at the Towers. He, too, seemed to think he
had taken an active part in bringing about the match by only speaking
about it. His first words on the subject to Lady Cumnor were,--

"I told you so. Now didn't I say what a good, suitable thing this
affair between Gibson and Clare would be! I don't know when I've been
so much pleased. You may despise the trade of match-maker, my lady,
but I am very proud of it. After this, I shall go on looking out
for suitable cases among the middle-aged people of my acquaintance.
I shan't meddle with young folks, they are so apt to be fanciful;
but I've been so successful in this, that I do think it's good
encouragement to go on."

"Go on--with what?" asked Lady Cumnor, drily.

"Oh, planning,--you can't deny that I planned this match."

"I don't think you are likely to do either much good or harm by
planning," she replied, with cool, good sense.

"It puts it into people's heads, my dear."

"Yes, if you speak about your plans to them, of course it does. But
in this case you never spoke to either Mr. Gibson or Clare, did you?"

All at once the recollection of how Clare had come upon the passage
in Lord Cumnor's letter flashed on his lady, but she did not say
anything about it, but left her husband to flounder about as best he
might.

"No! I never spoke to them; of course not."

"Then you must be strongly mesmeric, and your will acted upon theirs,
if you are to take credit for any part in the affair," continued his
pitiless wife.

"I really can't say. It's no use looking back to what I said or
did. I'm very well satisfied with it, and that's enough, and I mean
to show them how much I'm pleased. I shall give Clare something
towards her rigging out, and they shall have a breakfast at Ashcombe
Manor-house. I'll write to Preston about it. When did you say they
were to be married?"

"I think they'd better wait till Christmas, and I have told them so.
It would amuse the children, going over to Ashcombe for the wedding;
and if it's bad weather during the holidays I'm always afraid of
their finding it dull at the Towers. It's very different if it's a
good frost, and they can go out skating and sledging in the park. But
these last two years it has been so wet for them, poor dears!"

"And will the other poor dears be content to wait to make a holiday
for your grandchildren? 'To make a Roman holiday.' Pope, or somebody
else, has a line of poetry like that. 'To make a Roman holiday,'"--he
repeated, pleased with his unusual aptitude at quotation.

"It's Byron, and it's nothing to do with the subject in hand. I'm
surprised at your lordship's quoting Byron,--he was a very immoral
poet."

"I saw him take his oaths in the House of Lords," said Lord Cumnor,
apologetically.

"Well! the less said about him the better," said Lady Cumnor. "I have
told Clare that she had better not think of being married before
Christmas: and it won't do for her to give up her school in a hurry
either."

But Clare did not intend to wait till Christmas; and for this once
she carried her point against the will of the countess, and without
many words, or any open opposition. She had a harder task in setting
aside Mr. Gibson's desire to have Cynthia over for the wedding,
even if she went back to her school at Boulogne directly after the
ceremony. At first she had said that it would be delightful, a
charming plan; only she feared that she must give up her own wishes
to have her child near her at such a time, on account of the expense
of the double journey.

But Mr. Gibson, economical as he was in his habitual expenditure,
had a really generous heart. He had already shown it, in entirely
relinquishing his future wife's life-interest in the very small
property the late Mr. Kirkpatrick had left, in favour of Cynthia;
while he arranged that she should come to his home as a daughter as
soon as she left the school she was at. The life-interest was about
thirty pounds a year. Now he gave Mrs. Kirkpatrick three five-pound
notes, saying that he hoped they would do away with the objections
to Cynthia's coming over to the wedding; and at the time Mrs.
Kirkpatrick felt as if they would, and caught the reflection of his
strong wish, and fancied it was her own. If the letter could have
been written and the money sent off that day while the reflected
glow of affection lasted, Cynthia would have been bridesmaid to
her mother. But a hundred little interruptions came in the way of
letter-writing; and by the next day maternal love had diminished;
and the value affixed to the money had increased: money had been
so much needed, so hardly earned in Mrs. Kirkpatrick's life; while
the perhaps necessary separation of mother and child had lessened
the amount of affection the former had to bestow. So she persuaded
herself, afresh, that it would be unwise to disturb Cynthia at her
studies; to interrupt the fulfilment of her duties just after the
_semestre_ had begun afresh; and she wrote a letter to Madame Lefevre
so well imbued with this persuasion, that an answer which was almost
an echo of her words was returned, the sense of which being conveyed
to Mr. Gibson, who was no great French scholar, settled the vexed
question, to his moderate but unfeigned regret. But the fifteen
pounds were not returned. Indeed, not merely that sum, but a
great part of the hundred which Lord Cumnor had given her for her
trousseau, was required to pay off debts at Ashcombe; for the school
had been anything but flourishing since Mrs. Kirkpatrick had had it.
It was really very much to her credit that she preferred clearing
herself from debt to purchasing wedding finery. But it was one of the
few points to be respected in Mrs. Kirkpatrick that she had always
been careful in payment to the shops where she dealt; it was a little
sense of duty cropping out. Whatever other faults might arise from
her superficial and flimsy character, she was always uneasy till she
was out of debt. Yet she had no scruple in appropriating her future
husband's money to her own use, when it was decided that it was not
to be employed as he intended. What new articles she bought for
herself, were all such as would make a show, and an impression upon
the ladies of Hollingford. She argued with herself that linen, and
all under-clothing, would never be seen; while she knew that every
gown she had, would give rise to much discussion, and would be
counted up in the little town.

So her stock of underclothing was very small, and scarcely any of it
new; but it was made of dainty material, and was finely mended up
by her deft fingers, many a night long after her pupils were in bed;
inwardly resolving all the time she sewed, that hereafter some one
else should do her plain-work. Indeed, many a little circumstance of
former subjection to the will of others rose up before her during
these quiet hours, as an endurance or a suffering never to occur
again. So apt are people to look forward to a different kind of life
from that to which they have been accustomed, as being free from care
and trial! She recollected how, one time during this very summer at
the Towers, after she was engaged to Mr. Gibson, when she had taken
above an hour to arrange her hair in some new mode carefully studied
from Mrs. Bradley's fashion-book--after all, when she came down,
looking her very best, as she thought, and ready for her lover, Lady
Cumnor had sent her back again to her room, just as if she had been
a little child, to do her hair over again, and not to make such a
figure of fun of herself! Another time she had been sent to change
her gown for one in her opinion far less becoming, but which suited
Lady Cumnor's taste better. These were little things; but they were
late samples of what in different shapes she had had to endure for
many years; and her liking for Mr. Gibson grew in proportion to her
sense of the evils from which he was going to serve as a means of
escape. After all, that interval of hope and plain-sewing, intermixed
though it was with tuition, was not disagreeable. Her wedding-dress
was secure. Her former pupils at the Towers were going to present her
with that; they were to dress her from head to foot on the auspicious
day. Lord Cumnor, as has been said, had given her a hundred pounds
for her trousseau, and had sent Mr. Preston a carte-blanche order for
the wedding-breakfast in the old hall in Ashcombe Manor-house. Lady
Cumnor--a little put out by the marriage not being deferred till
her grandchildren's Christmas holidays--had nevertheless given Mrs.
Kirkpatrick an excellent English-made watch and chain; more clumsy
but more serviceable than the little foreign elegance that had hung
at her side so long, and misled her so often.

Her preparations were thus in a very considerable state of
forwardness, while Mr. Gibson had done nothing as yet towards any new
arrangement or decoration of his house for his intended bride. He
knew he ought to do something. But what? Where to begin, when so much
was out of order, and he had so little time for superintendence?
At length he came to the wise decision of asking one of the Miss
Brownings, for old friendship's sake, to take the trouble of
preparing what was immediately requisite; and resolved to leave all
the more ornamental decorations that he proposed, to the taste of his
future wife. But before making his request to the Miss Brownings, he
had to tell them of his engagement, which had hitherto been kept a
secret from the townspeople, who had set down his frequent visits
at the Towers to the score of the countess's health. He felt how he
should have laughed in his sleeve at any middle-aged widower who
came to him with a confession of the kind he had now to make to Miss
Brownings, and disliked the idea of the necessary call: but it was to
be done, so one evening he went in "promiscuous," as they called it,
and told them his story. At the end of the first chapter--that is to
say, at the end of the story of Mr. Coxe's calf-love, Miss Browning
held up her hands in surprise.

"To think of Molly, as I have held in long-clothes, coming to have a
lover! Well, to be sure! Sister Phoebe--" (she was just coming into
the room), "here's a piece of news! Molly Gibson has got a lover!
One may almost say she's had an offer! Mr. Gibson, may not one?--and
she's but sixteen!"

"Seventeen, sister," said Miss Phoebe, who piqued herself on
knowing all about dear Mr. Gibson's domestic affairs. "Seventeen, the
22nd of last June."

"Well, have it your own way. Seventeen, if you like to call her so!"
said Miss Browning, impatiently. "The fact is still the same--she's
got a lover; and it seems to me she was in long-clothes only
yesterday."

"I'm sure I hope her course of true love will run smooth," said Miss
Phoebe.

Now Mr. Gibson came in; for his story was not half told, and he
did not want them to run away too far with the idea of Molly's
love-affair.

"Molly knows nothing about it. I haven't even named it to any one
but you two, and to one other friend. I trounced Coxe well, and did
my best to keep his attachment--as he calls it--in bounds. But I
was sadly puzzled what to do about Molly. Miss Eyre was away, and I
couldn't leave them in the house together without any older woman."

"Oh, Mr. Gibson! why did you not send her to us?" broke in Miss
Browning. "We would have done anything in our power for you; for your
sake, as well as her poor dear mother's."

"Thank you. I know you would, but it wouldn't have done to have had
her in Hollingford, just at the time of Coxe's effervescence. He's
better now. His appetite has come back with double force, after the
fasting he thought it right to exhibit. He had three helpings of
black-currant dumpling yesterday."

"I am sure you are most liberal, Mr. Gibson. Three helpings! And, I
daresay, butcher's meat in proportion?"

"Oh! I only named it because, with such very young men, it's
generally see-saw between appetite and love, and I thought the third
helping a very good sign. But still, you know, what has happened
once, may happen again."

"I don't know. Phoebe had an offer of marriage once--" said Miss
Browning.

"Hush! sister. It might hurt his feelings to have it spoken about."

"Nonsense, child! It's five-and-twenty years ago; and his eldest
daughter is married herself."

"I own he has not been constant," pleaded Miss Phoebe, in
her tender, piping voice. "All men are not--like you, Mr.
Gibson--faithful to the memory of their first-love."

Mr. Gibson winced. Jeannie was his first love; but her name had never
been breathed in Hollingford. His wife--good, pretty, sensible, and
beloved as she had been--was not his second; no, nor his third love.
And now he was come to make a confidence about his second marriage.

"Well, well," said he; "at any rate, I thought I must do something to
protect Molly from such affairs while she was so young, and before I
had given my sanction. Miss Eyre's little nephew fell ill of scarlet
fever--"

"Ah! by-the-by, how careless of me not to inquire. How is the poor
little fellow?"

"Worse--better. It doesn't signify to what I've got to say now; the
fact was, Miss Eyre couldn't come back to my house for some time, and
I cannot leave Molly altogether at Hamley."

"Ah! I see now, why there was that sudden visit to Hamley. Upon my
word, it's quite a romance."

"I do like hearing of a love-affair," murmured Miss Phoebe.

"Then if you'll let me get on with my story, you shall hear of mine,"
said Mr. Gibson, quite beyond his patience with their constant
interruptions.

"Yours!" said Miss Phoebe, faintly.

"Bless us and save us!" said Miss Browning, with less sentiment in
her tone; "what next?"

"My marriage, I hope," said Mr. Gibson, choosing to take her
expression of intense surprise literally. "And that's what I came to
speak to you about."

A little hope darted up in Miss Phoebe's breast. She had often said
to her sister, in the confidence of curling-time (ladies wore curls
in those days), "that the only man who could ever bring her to think
of matrimony was Mr. Gibson; but that if he ever proposed, she
should feel bound to accept him, for poor dear Mary's sake;" never
explaining what exact style of satisfaction she imagined she should
give to her dead friend by marrying her late husband. Phoebe played
nervously with the strings of her black silk apron. Like the Caliph
in the Eastern story, a whole lifetime of possibilities passed
through her mind in an instant, of which possibilities the question
of questions was, Could she leave her sister? Attend, Phoebe, to
the present moment, and listen to what is being said before you
distress yourself with a perplexity which will never arise.

"Of course it has been an anxious thing for me to decide who I should
ask to be the mistress of my family, the mother of my girl; but I
think I've decided rightly at last. The lady I have chosen--"

"Tell us at once who she is, there's a good man," said
straight-forward Miss Browning.

"Mrs. Kirkpatrick," said the bridegroom elect.

"What! the governess at the Towers, that the countess makes so much
of?"

"Yes; she is much valued by them--and deservedly so. She keeps a
school now at Ashcombe, and is accustomed to housekeeping. She has
brought up the young ladies at the Towers, and has a daughter of her
own, therefore it is probable she will have a kind, motherly feeling
towards Molly."

"She's a very elegant-looking woman," said Miss Phoebe, feeling it
incumbent upon her to say something laudatory, by way of concealing
the thoughts that had just been passing through her mind. "I've seen
her in the carriage, riding backwards with the countess: a very
pretty woman, I should say."

"Nonsense, sister," said Miss Browning. "What has her elegance or
prettiness to do with the affair? Did you ever know a widower marry
again for such trifles as those? It's always from a sense of duty of
one kind or another--isn't it, Mr. Gibson? They want a housekeeper;
or they want a mother for their children; or they think their last
wife would have liked it."

Perhaps the thought had passed through the elder sister's mind that
Phoebe might have been chosen, for there was a sharp acrimony in
her tone; not unfamiliar to Mr. Gibson, but with which he did not
choose to cope at this present moment.

"You must have it your own way, Miss Browning. Settle my motives for
me. I don't pretend to be quite clear about them myself. But I am
clear in wishing heartily to keep my old friends, and for them to
love my future wife for my sake. I don't know any two women in the
world, except Molly and Mrs. Kirkpatrick, I regard as much as I do
you. Besides, I want to ask you if you will let Molly come and stay
with you till after my marriage?"

"You might have asked us before you asked Madam Hamley," said Miss
Browning, only half mollified. "We are your old friends; and we were
her mother's friends, too; though we are not county folk."

"That's unjust," said Mr. Gibson. "And you know it is."

"I don't know. You are always with Lord Hollingford, when you can
get at him, much more than you ever are with Mr. Goodenough, or Mr.
Smith. And you are always going over to Hamley."

Miss Browning was not one to give in all at once.

"I seek Lord Hollingford as I should seek such a man, whatever his
rank or position might be: usher to a school, carpenter, shoemaker,
if it were possible for them to have had a similar character of mind
developed by similar advantages. Mr. Goodenough is a very clever
attorney, with strong local interests and not a thought beyond."

"Well, well, don't go on arguing, it always gives me a headache, as
Phoebe knows. I didn't mean what I said, that's enough, isn't it?
I'll retract anything sooner than be reasoned with. Where were we
before you began your arguments?"

"About dear little Molly coming to pay us a visit," said Miss
Phoebe.

"I should have asked you at first, only Coxe was so rampant with his
love. I didn't know what he might do, or how troublesome he might be
both to Molly and you. But he has cooled down now. Absence has had
a very tranquillizing effect, and I think Molly may be in the same
town with him, without any consequences beyond a few sighs every time
she's brought to his mind by meeting her. And I've got another favour
to ask of you, so you see it would never do for me to argue with you,
Miss Browning, when I ought to be a humble suppliant. Something must
be done to the house to make it all ready for the future Mrs. Gibson.
It wants painting and papering shamefully, and I should think some
new furniture, but I'm sure I don't know what. Would you be so very
kind as to look over the place, and see how far a hundred pounds
will go? The dining-room walls must be painted; we'll keep the
drawing-room paper for her choice, and I've a little spare money for
that room for her to lay out; but all the rest of the house I'll
leave to you, if you'll only be kind enough to help an old friend."

This was a commission which exactly gratified Miss Browning's love
of power. The disposal of money involved patronage of trades people,
such as she had exercised in her father's lifetime, but had had very
little chance of showing since his death. Her usual good-humour was
quite restored by this proof of confidence in her taste and economy,
while Miss Phoebe's imagination dwelt rather on the pleasure of a
visit from Molly.




CHAPTER XIII.

MOLLY GIBSON'S NEW FRIENDS.


Time was speeding on; it was now the middle of August,--if anything
was to be done to the house, it must be done at once. Indeed, in
several ways Mr. Gibson's arrangements with Miss Browning had not
been made too soon. The squire had heard that Osborne might probably
return home for a few days before going abroad; and, though the
growing intimacy between Roger and Molly did not alarm him in the
least, yet he was possessed by a very hearty panic lest the heir
might take a fancy to the surgeon's daughter; and he was in such a
fidget for her to leave the house before Osborne came home, that his
wife lived in constant terror lest he should make it too obvious to
their visitor.

Every young girl of seventeen or so, who is at all thoughtful, is
very apt to make a Pope out of the first person who presents to
her a new or larger system of duty than that by which she has been
unconsciously guided hitherto. Such a Pope was Roger to Molly; she
looked to his opinion, to his authority on almost every subject, yet
he had only said one or two things in a terse manner which gave them
the force of precepts--stable guides to her conduct--and had shown
the natural superiority in wisdom and knowledge which is sure to
exist between a highly educated young man of no common intelligence,
and an ignorant girl of seventeen, who yet was well capable of
appreciation. Still, although they were drawn together in this very
pleasant relationship, each was imagining some one very different for
the future owner of their whole heart--their highest and completest
love. Roger looked to find a grand woman, his equal, and his empress;
beautiful in person, serene in wisdom, ready for counsel, as was
Egeria. Molly's little wavering maiden fancy dwelt on the unseen
Osborne, who was now a troubadour, and now a knight, such as he wrote
about in one of his own poems; some one like Osborne, perhaps, rather
than Osborne himself, for she shrank from giving a personal form
and name to the hero that was to be. The squire was not unwise in
wishing her well out of the house before Osborne came home, if he was
considering her peace of mind. Yet, when she went away from the hall
he missed her constantly; it had been so pleasant to have her there
fulfilling all the pretty offices of a daughter; cheering the meals,
so often tÉte-ł-tÉte betwixt him and Roger, with her innocent wise
questions, her lively interest in their talk, her merry replies to
his banter.

And Roger missed her too. Sometimes her remarks had probed into his
mind, and excited him to the deep thought in which he delighted; at
other times he had felt himself of real help to her in her hours of
need, and in making her take an interest in books, which treated of
higher things than the continual fiction and poetry which she had
hitherto read. He felt something like an affectionate tutor suddenly
deprived of his most promising pupil; he wondered how she would go
on without him; whether she would be puzzled and disheartened by the
books he had lent her to read; how she and her stepmother would get
along together? She occupied his thoughts a good deal those first
few days after she left the hall. Mrs. Hamley regretted her more,
and longer than did the other two. She had given her the place of
a daughter in her heart; and now she missed the sweet feminine
companionship, the playful caresses, the never-ceasing attentions;
the very need of sympathy in her sorrows, that Molly had shown so
openly from time to time; all these things had extremely endeared her
to the tender-hearted Mrs. Hamley.

Molly, too, felt the change of atmosphere keenly; and she blamed
herself for so feeling even more keenly still. But she could not
help having a sense of refinement, which had made her appreciate the
whole manner of being at the Hall. By her dear old friends the Miss
Brownings she was petted and caressed so much that she became ashamed
of noticing the coarser and louder tones in which they spoke, the
provincialism of their pronunciation, the absence of interest in
things, and their greediness of details about persons. They asked her
questions which she was puzzled enough to answer about her future
stepmother; her loyalty to her father forbidding her to reply fully
and truthfully. She was always glad when they began to make inquiries
as to every possible affair at the Hall. She had been so happy there;
she had liked them all, down to the very dogs, so thoroughly, that it
was easy work replying: she did not mind telling them everything,
even to the style of Mrs. Hamley's invalid dress; nor what wine the
squire drank at dinner. Indeed, talking about these things helped
her to recall the happiest time in her life. But one evening, as
they were all sitting together after tea in the little upstairs
drawing-room, looking into the High Street--Molly discoursing away on
the various pleasures of Hamley Hall, and just then telling of all
Roger's wisdom in natural science, and some of the curiosities he had
shown her, she was suddenly pulled up by this little speech,--

"You seem to have seen a great deal of Mr. Roger, Molly!" said Miss
Browning, in a way intended to convey a great deal of meaning to her
sister and none at all to Molly. But--

   The man recovered of the bite;
   The dog it was that died.

Molly was perfectly aware of Miss Browning's emphatic tone, though at
first she was perplexed as to its cause; while Miss Phoebe was just
then too much absorbed in knitting the heel of her stocking to be
fully alive to her sister's nods and winks.

"Yes; he was very kind to me," said Molly, slowly, pondering over
Miss Browning's manner, and unwilling to say more until she had
satisfied herself to what the question tended.

"I daresay you will soon be going to Hamley Hall again? He's not
the eldest son, you know, Phoebe! Don't make my head ache with your
eternal 'eighteen, nineteen,' but attend to the conversation. Molly
is telling us how much she saw of Mr. Roger, and how kind he was to
her. I've always heard he was a very nice young man, my dear. Tell
us some more about him! Now, Phoebe, attend! How was he kind to you,
Molly?"

"Oh, he told me what books to read; and one day he made me notice how
many bees I saw--"

"Bees, child! What do you mean? Either you or he must have been
crazy!"

"No, not at all. There are more than two hundred kinds of bees in
England, and he wanted me to notice the difference between them and
flies. Miss Browning, I can't help seeing what you fancy," said
Molly, as red as fire, "but it is very wrong; it is all a mistake. I
won't speak another word about Mr. Roger or Hamley at all, if it puts
such silly notions into your head."

"Highty-tighty! Here's a young lady to be lecturing her elders! Silly
notions indeed! They are in your head, it seems. And let me tell you,
Molly, you are too young to let your mind be running on lovers."

Molly had been once or twice called saucy and impertinent, and
certainly a little sauciness came out now.

"I never said what the 'silly notion' was, Miss Browning; did I now,
Miss Phoebe? Don't you see, dear Miss Phoebe, it is all her own
interpretation, and according to her own fancy, this foolish talk
about lovers?"

Molly was flaming with indignation; but she had appealed to the
wrong person for justice. Miss Phoebe tried to make peace after the
fashion of weak-minded people, who would cover over the unpleasant
sight of a sore, instead of trying to heal it.

"I'm sure I don't know anything about it, my dear. It seems to me
that what Dorothy was saying was very true--very true indeed; and I
think, love, you misunderstood her; or, perhaps, she misunderstood
you; or I may be misunderstanding it altogether; so we'd better not
talk any more about it. What price did you say you were going to give
for the drugget in Mr. Gibson's dining-room, sister?"

So Miss Browning and Molly went on till evening, each chafed and
angry with the other. They wished each other good-night, going
through the usual forms in the coolest manner possible. Molly went
up to her little bedroom, clean and neat as a bedroom could be, with
draperies of small delicate patchwork--bed-curtains, window-curtains,
and counterpane; a japanned toilette-table, full of little boxes,
with a small looking-glass affixed to it, that distorted every face
that was so unwise as to look in it. This room had been to the child
one of the most dainty and luxurious places ever seen, in comparison
with her own bare, white-dimity bedroom; and now she was sleeping in
it, as a guest, and all the quaint adornments she had once peeped at
as a great favour, as they were carefully wrapped up in cap-paper,
were set out for her use. And yet how little she had deserved this
hospitable care; how impertinent she had been; how cross she had felt
ever since! She was crying tears of penitence and youthful misery
when there came a low tap to the door. Molly opened it, and there
stood Miss Browning, in a wonderful erection of a nightcap, and
scantily attired in a coloured calico jacket over her scrimpy and
short white petticoat.

"I was afraid you were asleep, child," said she, coming in and
shutting the door. "But I wanted to say to you we've got wrong
to-day, somehow; and I think it was perhaps my doing. It's as well
Phoebe shouldn't know, for she thinks me perfect; and when there's
only two of us, we get along better if one of us thinks the other
can do no wrong. But I rather think I was a little cross. We'll not
say any more about it, Molly; only we'll go to sleep friends,--and
friends we'll always be, child, won't we? Now give me a kiss,
and don't cry and swell your eyes up;--and put out your candle
carefully."

"I was wrong--it was my fault," said Molly, kissing her.

"Fiddlestick-ends! Don't contradict me! I say it was my fault, and
I won't hear another word about it."

The next day Molly went with Miss Browning to see the changes going
on in her father's house. To her they were but dismal improvements.
The faint grey of the dining-room walls, which had harmonized well
enough with the deep crimson of the moreen curtains, and which
when well cleaned looked thinly coated rather than dirty, was now
exchanged for a pink salmon-colour of a very glowing hue; and the
new curtains were of that pale sea-green just coming into fashion.
"Very bright and pretty," Miss Browning called it; and in the first
renewing of their love Molly could not bear to contradict her. She
could only hope that the green and brown drugget would tone down the
brightness and prettiness. There was scaffolding here, scaffolding
there, and Betty scolding everywhere.

"Come up now, and see your papa's bedroom. He's sleeping upstairs in
yours, that everything may be done up afresh in his."

Molly could just remember, in faint clear lines of distinctness, the
being taken into this very room to bid farewell to her dying mother.
She could see the white linen, the white muslin, surrounding the
pale, wan wistful face, with the large, longing eyes, yearning for
one more touch of the little soft warm child, whom she was too feeble
to clasp in her arms, already growing numb in death. Many a time when
Molly had been in this room since that sad day, had she seen in vivid
fancy that same wan wistful face lying on the pillow, the outline
of the form beneath the clothes; and the girl had not shrunk from
such visions, but rather cherished them, as preserving to her the
remembrance of her mother's outward semblance. Her eyes were full of
tears, as she followed Miss Browning into this room to see it under
its new aspect. Nearly everything was changed--the position of the
bed and the colour of the furniture; there was a grand toilette-table
now, with a glass upon it, instead of the primitive substitute of the
top of a chest of drawers, with a mirror above upon the wall, sloping
downwards; these latter things had served her mother during her short
married life.

"You see, we must have all in order for a lady who has passed so
much of her time in the countess's mansion," said Miss Browning, who
was now quite reconciled to the marriage, thanks to the pleasant
employment of furnishing that had devolved upon her in consequence.
"Cromer, the upholsterer, wanted to persuade me to have a sofa and a
writing-table. These men will say anything is the fashion, if they
want to sell an article. I said, 'No, no, Cromer: bedrooms are for
sleeping in, and sitting-rooms are for sitting in. Keep everything to
its right purpose, and don't try and delude me into nonsense.' Why,
my mother would have given us a fine scolding if she had ever caught
us in our bedrooms in the daytime. We kept our out-door things in
a closet downstairs; and there was a very tidy place for washing
our hands, which is as much as one wants in the daytime. Stuffing
up a bedroom with sofas and tables! I never heard of such a thing.
Besides, a hundred pounds won't last for ever. I sha'n't be able to
do anything for your room, Molly!"

"I'm right down glad of it," said Molly. "Nearly everything in it was
what mamma had when she lived with my great-uncle. I wouldn't have
had it changed for the world; I am so fond of it."

"Well, there's no danger of it, now the money is run out. By the way,
Molly, who's to buy you a bridesmaid's dress?"

"I don't know," said Molly; "I suppose I am to be a bridesmaid; but
no one has spoken to me about my dress."

"Then I shall ask your papa."

"Please, don't. He must have to spend a great deal of money just now.
Besides, I would rather not be at the wedding, if they'll let me stay
away."

"Nonsense, child. Why, all the town would be talking of it. You must
go, and you must be well dressed, for your father's sake."

But Mr. Gibson had thought of Molly's dress, although he had said
nothing about it to her. He had commissioned his future wife to get
her what was requisite; and presently a very smart dressmaker came
over from the county-town to try on a dress, which was both so simple
and so elegant as at once to charm Molly. When it came home all ready
to put on, Molly had a private dressing-up for the Miss Brownings'
benefit; and she was almost startled when she looked into the glass,
and saw the improvement in her appearance. "I wonder if I'm pretty,"
thought she. "I almost think I am--in this kind of dress I mean, of
course. Betty would say, 'Fine feathers make fine birds.'"

When she went downstairs in her bridal attire, and with shy blushes
presented herself for inspection, she was greeted with a burst of
admiration.

"Well, upon my word! I shouldn't have known you." ("Fine feathers,"
thought Molly, and checked her rising vanity.)

"You are really beautiful--isn't she, sister?" said Miss Phoebe.
"Why, my dear, if you were always dressed, you would be prettier than
your dear mamma, whom we always reckoned so very personable."

"You're not a bit like her. You favour your father, and white always
sets off a brown complexion."

"But isn't she beautiful?" persevered Miss Phoebe.

"Well! and if she is, Providence made her, and not she herself.
Besides, the dressmaker must go shares. What a fine India muslin it
is! it'll have cost a pretty penny!"

Mr. Gibson and Molly drove over to Ashcombe, the night before the
wedding, in the one yellow post-chaise that Hollingford possessed.
They were to be Mr. Preston's, or, rather, my lord's guests at the
Manor-house. The Manor-house came up to its name, and delighted Molly
at first sight. It was built of stone, had many gables and mullioned
windows, and was covered over with Virginian creeper and late-blowing
roses. Molly did not know Mr. Preston, who stood in the doorway
to greet her father. She took standing with him as a young lady
at once, and it was the first time she had met with the kind of
behaviour--half complimentary, half flirting--which some men think
it necessary to assume with every woman under five-and-twenty. Mr.
Preston was very handsome, and knew it. He was a fair man, with
light-brown hair and whiskers; grey, roving, well-shaped eyes, with
lashes darker than his hair; and a figure rendered easy and supple by
the athletic exercises in which his excellence was famous, and which
had procured him admission into much higher society than he was
otherwise entitled to enter. He was a capital cricketer; was so good
a shot, that any house desirous of reputation for its bags on the
12th or the 1st, was glad to have him for a guest. He taught young
ladies to play billiards on a wet day, or went in for the game in
serious earnest when required. He knew half the private theatrical
plays off by heart, and was invaluable in arranging impromptu
charades and tableaux. He had his own private reasons for wishing
to get up a flirtation with Molly just at this time; he had amused
himself so much with the widow when she first came to Ashcombe, that
he fancied that the sight of him, standing by her less polished, less
handsome, middle-aged husband, might be too much of a contrast to be
agreeable. Besides, he had really a strong passion for some one else;
some one who would be absent; and that passion it was necessary for
him to conceal. So that, altogether, he had resolved, even had "the
little Gibson-girl" (as he called her) been less attractive than she
was, to devote himself to her for the next sixteen hours.

They were taken by their host into a wainscoted parlour, where a
wood fire crackled and burnt, and the crimson curtains shut out the
waning day and the outer chill. Here the table was laid for dinner;
snowy table-linen, bright silver, clear sparkling glass, wine and an
autumnal dessert on the sideboard. Yet Mr. Preston kept apologizing
to Molly for the rudeness of his bachelor home, for the smallness of
the room, the great dining-room being already appropriated by his
housekeeper, in preparation for the morrow's breakfast. And then he
rang for a servant to show Molly to her room. She was taken into a
most comfortable chamber; a wood fire on the hearth, candles lighted
on the toilette-table, dark woollen curtains surrounding a snow-white
bed, great vases of china standing here and there.

"This is my Lady Harriet's room when her ladyship comes to the
Manor-house with my lord the earl," said the housemaid, striking
out thousands of brilliant sparks by a well-directed blow at a
smouldering log. "Shall I help you to dress, miss? I always helps her
ladyship."

Molly, quite aware of the fact that she had but her white muslin gown
for the wedding besides that she had on, dismissed the good woman,
and was thankful to be left to herself.

"Dinner" was it called? Why, it was nearly eight o'clock; and
preparations for bed seemed a more natural employment than dressing
at this hour of night. All the dressing she could manage was the
placing of a red damask rose or two in the band of her grey stuff
gown, there being a great nosegay of choice autumnal flowers on the
toilette-table. She did try the effect of another crimson rose in
her black hair, just above her ear; it was very pretty, but too
coquettish, and so she put it back again. The dark-oak panels and
wainscoting of the whole house seemed to glow in warm light; there
were so many fires in different rooms, in the hall, and even one on
the landing of the staircase. Mr. Preston must have heard her step,
for he met her in the hall, and led her into a small drawing-room,
with closed folding-doors on one side, opening into the larger
drawing-room, as he told her. This room into which she entered
reminded her a little of Hamley--yellow-satin upholstery of seventy
or a hundred years ago, all delicately kept and scrupulously clean;
great Indian cabinets, and china jars, emitting spicy odours; a large
blazing fire, before which her father stood in his morning dress,
grave and thoughtful, as he had been all day.

"This room is that which Lady Harriet uses when she comes here with
her father for a day or two," said Mr. Preston. And Molly tried to
save her father by being ready to talk herself.

"Does she often come here?"

"Not often. But I fancy she likes being here when she does. Perhaps
she finds it an agreeable change after the more formal life she leads
at the Towers."

"I should think it was a very pleasant house to stay at," said Molly,
remembering the look of warm comfort that pervaded it. But a little
to her dismay Mr. Preston seemed to take it as a compliment to
himself.

"I was afraid a young lady like you might perceive all the
incongruities of a bachelor's home. I'm very much obliged to you,
Miss Gibson. In general I live pretty much in the room in which we
shall dine; and I've a sort of agent's office in which I keep books
and papers, and receive callers on business."

Then they went in to dinner. Molly thought everything that was served
was delicious, and cooked to the point of perfection; but they
did not seem to satisfy Mr. Preston, who apologized to his guests
several times for the bad cooking of this dish, or the omission
of a particular sauce to that; always referring to bachelor's
housekeeping, bachelor's this and bachelor's that, till Molly grew
quite impatient at the word. Her father's depression, which was still
continuing and rendering him very silent, made her uneasy; yet she
wished to conceal it from Mr. Preston; and so she talked away, trying
to obviate the sort of personal bearing which their host would give
to everything. She did not know when to leave the gentlemen, but her
father made a sign to her; and she was conducted back to the yellow
drawing-room by Mr. Preston, who made many apologies for leaving
her there alone. She enjoyed herself extremely, however, feeling at
liberty to prowl about, and examine all the curiosities the room
contained. Among other things was a Louis Quinze cabinet with lovely
miniatures in enamel let into the fine woodwork. She carried a candle
to it, and was looking intently at these faces when her father and
Mr. Preston came in. Her father still looked care-worn and anxious;
he came up and patted her on the back, looked at what she was looking
at, and then went off to silence and the fire. Mr. Preston took the
candle out of her hand, and threw himself into her interests with an
air of ready gallantry.

"That is said to be Mademoiselle de St. Quentin, a great beauty at
the French Court. This is Madame du Barri. Do you see any likeness in
Mademoiselle de St. Quentin to any one you know?" He had lowered his
voice a little as he asked this question.

"No!" said Molly, looking at it again. "I never saw any one half so
beautiful."

"But don't you see a likeness--in the eyes particularly?" he asked
again, with some impatience.

Molly tried hard to find out a resemblance, and was again
unsuccessful.

"It constantly reminds me of--of Miss Kirkpatrick."

"Does it?" said Molly, eagerly. "Oh! I am so glad--I've never seen
her, so of course I couldn't find out the likeness. You know her,
then, do you? Please tell me all about her."

He hesitated a moment before speaking. He smiled a little before
replying.

"She's very beautiful; that of course is understood when I say that
this miniature does not come up to her for beauty."

"And besides?--Go on, please."

"What do you mean by 'besides'?"

"Oh! I suppose she's very clever and accomplished?"

That was not in the least what Molly wanted to ask; but it was
difficult to word the vague vastness of her unspoken inquiry.

"She is clever naturally; she has picked up accomplishments. But she
has such a charm about her, one forgets what she herself is in the
halo that surrounds her. You ask me all this, Miss Gibson, and I
answer truthfully; or else I should not entertain one young lady with
my enthusiastic praises of another."

"I don't see why not," said Molly. "Besides, if you wouldn't do it
in general, I think you ought to do it in my case; for you, perhaps,
don't know, but she is coming to live with us when she leaves school,
and we are very nearly the same age; so it will be almost like having
a sister."

"She is to live with you, is she?" said Mr. Preston, to whom this
intelligence was news. "And when is she to leave school? I thought
she would surely have been at this wedding; but I was told she was
not to come. When is she to leave school?"

"I think it is to be at Easter. You know she's at Boulogne, and it's
a long journey for her to come alone; or else papa wished for her to
be at the marriage very much indeed."

"And her mother prevented it?--I understand."

"No, it wasn't her mother; it was the French schoolmistress, who
didn't think it desirable."

"It comes to pretty much the same thing. And she's to return and live
with you after Easter?"

"I believe so. Is she a grave or a merry person?"

"Never very grave, as far as I have seen of her. Sparkling would
be the word for her, I think. Do you ever write to her? If you do,
pray remember me to her, and tell her how we have been talking about
her--you and I."

"I never write to her," said Molly, rather shortly.

Tea came in; and after that they all went to bed. Molly heard her
father exclaim at the fire in his bedroom, and Mr. Preston's reply--

"I pique myself on my keen relish for all creature comforts, and also
on my power of doing without them, if need be. My lord's woods are
ample, and I indulge myself with a fire in my bedroom for nine months
in the year; yet I could travel in Iceland without wincing from the
cold."




CHAPTER XIV.

MOLLY FINDS HERSELF PATRONIZED.


The wedding went off much as such affairs do. Lord Cumnor and Lady
Harriet drove over from the Towers, so the hour for the ceremony
was as late as possible. Lord Cumnor came in order to officiate as
the bride's father, and was in more open glee than either bride or
bridegroom, or any one else. Lady Harriet came as a sort of amateur
bridesmaid, to "share Molly's duties," as she called it. They went
from the Manor-house in two carriages to the church in the park, Mr.
Preston and Mr. Gibson in one, and Molly, to her dismay, shut up with
Lord Cumnor and Lady Harriet in the other. Lady Harriet's gown of
white muslin had seen one or two garden-parties, and was not in the
freshest order; it had been rather a freak of the young lady's at the
last moment. She was very merry, and very much inclined to talk to
Molly, by way of finding out what sort of a little personage Clare
was to have for her future daughter. She began:--

"We mustn't crush this pretty muslin dress of yours. Put it over
papa's knee; he doesn't mind it in the least."

"What, my dear, a white dress!--no, to be sure not. I rather like
it. Besides, going to a wedding, who minds anything? It would be
different if we were going to a funeral."

Molly conscientiously strove to find out the meaning of this speech;
but before she had done so, Lady Harriet spoke again, going to the
point, as she always piqued herself on doing:

"I daresay it's something of a trial to you, this second marriage of
your father's; but you'll find Clare the most amiable of women. She
always let me have my own way, and I've no doubt she'll let you have
yours."

"I mean to try and like her," said Molly, in a low voice, striving
hard to keep down the tears that would keep rising to her eyes this
morning. "I've seen very little of her yet."

"Why, it's the very best thing for you that could have happened, my
dear," said Lord Cumnor. "You're growing up into a young lady--and
a very pretty young lady, too, if you'll allow an old man to say
so--and who so proper as your father's wife to bring you out, and
show you off, and take you to balls, and that kind of thing? I
always said this match that is going to come off to-day was the most
suitable thing I ever knew; and it's even a better thing for you than
for the people themselves."

"Poor child!" said Lady Harriet, who had caught a sight of Molly's
troubled face, "the thought of balls is too much for her just now;
but you'll like having Cynthia Kirkpatrick for a companion, shan't
you, dear?"

"Very much," said Molly, cheering up a little. "Do you know her?"

"Oh, I've seen her over and over again when she was a little girl,
and once or twice since. She's the prettiest creature that you ever
saw; and with eyes that mean mischief, if I'm not mistaken. But
Clare kept her spirit under pretty well when she was staying with
us,--afraid of her being troublesome, I fancy."

Before Molly could shape her next question, they were at the church;
and she and Lady Harriet went into a pew near the door to wait for
the bride, in whose train they were to proceed to the altar. The earl
drove on alone to fetch her from her own house, not a quarter of a
mile distant. It was pleasant to her to be led to the hymeneal altar
by a belted earl, and pleasant to have his daughter as a volunteer
bridesmaid. Mrs. Kirkpatrick in this flush of small gratifications,
and on the brink of matrimony with a man whom she liked, and who
would be bound to support her without any exertion of her own, looked
beamingly happy and handsome. A little cloud came over her face at
the sight of Mr. Preston,--the sweet perpetuity of her smile was
rather disturbed as he followed in Mr. Gibson's wake. But his face
never changed; he bowed to her gravely, and then seemed absorbed in
the service. Ten minutes, and all was over. The bride and bridegroom
were driving together to the Manor-house, Mr. Preston was walking
thither by a short cut, and Molly was again in the carriage with my
lord, rubbing his hands and chuckling, and Lady Harriet, trying to
be kind and consolatory, when her silence would have been the best
comfort.

Molly found out, to her dismay, that the plan was for her to return
with Lord Cumnor and Lady Harriet when they went back to the Towers
in the evening. In the meantime Lord Cumnor had business to do with
Mr. Preston, and after the happy couple had driven off on their
week's holiday tour, she was to be left alone with the formidable
Lady Harriet. When they were by themselves after all the others had
been thus disposed of, Lady Harriet sate still over the drawing-room
fire, holding a screen between it and her face, but gazing intently
at Molly for a minute or two. Molly was fully conscious of this
prolonged look, and was trying to get up her courage to return the
stare, when Lady Harriet suddenly said,--

"I like you;--you are a little wild creature, and I want to tame you.
Come here, and sit on this stool by me. What is your name? or what do
they call you?--as North-country people would express it."

"Molly Gibson. My real name is Mary."

"Molly is a nice, soft-sounding name. People in the last century
weren't afraid of homely names; now we are all so smart and fine: no
more 'Lady Bettys' now. I almost wonder they haven't re-christened
all the worsted and knitting-cotton that bears her name. Fancy Lady
Constantia's cotton, or Lady Anna-Maria's worsted."

"I didn't know there was a Lady Betty's cotton," said Molly.

"That proves you don't do fancy-work! You'll find Clare will set
you to it, though. She used to set me at piece after piece: knights
kneeling to ladies; impossible flowers. But I must do her the justice
to add that when I got tired of them she finished them herself. I
wonder how you'll get on together?"

"So do I!" sighed out Molly, under her breath.

"I used to think I managed her, till one day an uncomfortable
suspicion arose that all the time she had been managing me. Still
it's easy work to let oneself be managed; at any rate till one wakens
up to the consciousness of the process, and then it may become
amusing, if one takes it in that light."

"I should hate to be managed," said Molly, indignantly. "I'll try and
do what she wishes for papa's sake, if she'll only tell me outright;
but I should dislike to be trapped into anything."

"Now I," said Lady Harriet, "am too lazy to avoid traps; and I rather
like to remark the cleverness with which they're set. But then,
of course, I know that if I choose to exert myself, I can break
through the withes of green flax with which they try to bind me. Now,
perhaps, you won't be able."

"I don't quite understand what you mean," said Molly.

"Oh, well--never mind; I daresay it's as well for you that you
shouldn't. The moral of all I have been saying is, 'Be a good girl,
and suffer yourself to be led, and you'll find your new stepmother
the sweetest creature imaginable.' You'll get on capitally with her,
I make no doubt. How you'll get on with her daughter is another
affair; but I daresay very well. Now we'll ring for tea; for I
suppose that heavy breakfast is to stand for our lunch."

Mr. Preston came into the room just at this time, and Molly was a
little surprised at Lady Harriet's cool manner of dismissing him,
remembering as she did how Mr. Preston had implied his intimacy with
her ladyship the evening before at dinner-time.

"I cannot bear that sort of person," said Lady Harriet, almost before
he was out of hearing; "giving himself airs of gallantry towards
one to whom his simple respect is all his duty. I can talk to one
of my father's labourers with pleasure, while with a man like that
underbred fop I am all over thorns and nettles. What is it the Irish
call that style of creature? They've some capital word for it, I
know. What is it?"

"I don't know--I never heard it," said Molly, a little ashamed of her
ignorance.

"Oh! that shows you've never read Miss Edgeworth's tales;--now,
have you? If you had, you'd have recollected that there was such
a word, even if you didn't remember what it was. If you've never
read those stories, they would be just the thing to beguile your
solitude--vastly improving and moral, and yet quite sufficiently
interesting. I'll lend them to you while you're all alone."

"I'm not alone. I'm not at home, but on a visit to Miss Brownings."

"Then I'll bring them to you. I know the Miss Brownings; they used
to come regularly on the school-day to the Towers. Pecksy and Flapsy
I used to call them. I like the Miss Brownings; one gets enough of
respect from them at any rate; and I've always wanted to see the
kind of _mÄnage_ of such people. I'll bring you a whole pile of Miss
Edgeworth's stories, my dear."

Molly sate quite silent for a minute or two; then she mustered up
courage to speak out what was in her mind.

"Your ladyship" (the title was the firstfruits of the lesson, as
Molly took it, on paying due respect)--"your ladyship keeps speaking
of the sort of--the class of people to which I belong as if it was a
kind of strange animal you were talking about; yet you talk so openly
to me that--"

"Well, go on--I like to hear you."

Still silence.

"You think me in your heart a little impertinent--now, don't you?"
said Lady Harriet, almost kindly.

Molly held her peace for two or three moments; then she lifted her
beautiful, honest eyes to Lady Harriet's face, and said,--

"Yes!--a little. But I think you a great many other things."

"We'll leave the 'other things' for the present. Don't you see,
little one, I talk after my kind, just as you talk after your kind.
It's only on the surface with both of us. Why, I daresay some of your
good Hollingford ladies talk of the poor people in a manner which
they would consider as impertinent in their turn, if they could hear
it. But I ought to be more considerate when I remember how often
my blood has boiled at the modes of speech and behaviour of one of
my aunts, mamma's sister, Lady-- No! I won't name names. Any one
who earns his livelihood by any exercise of head or hands, from
professional people and rich merchants down to labourers, she calls
'persons.' She would never in her most slip-slop talk accord them
even the conventional title of 'gentlemen;' and the way in which
she takes possession of human beings, 'my woman,' 'my people,'--but,
after all, it is only a way of speaking. I ought not to have used
it to you; but somehow I separate you from all these Hollingford
people."

"But why?" persevered Molly. "I'm one of them."

"Yes, you are. But--now don't reprove me again for impertinence--most
of them are so unnatural in their exaggerated respect and admiration
when they come up to the Towers, and put on so much pretence by way
of fine manners, that they only make themselves objects of ridicule.
You at least are simple and truthful, and that's why I separate you
in my own mind from them, and have talked unconsciously to you as I
would--well! now here's another piece of impertinence--as I would to
my equal--in rank, I mean; for I don't set myself up in solid things
as any better than my neighbours. Here's tea, however, come in time
to stop me from growing too humble."

It was a very pleasant little tea in the fading September twilight.

Just as it was ended, in came Mr. Preston again:--

"Lady Harriet, will you allow me the pleasure of showing you some
alterations I have made in the flower-garden--in which I have tried
to consult your taste--before it grows dark?"


[Illustration: UNWELCOME ATTENTIONS.]


"Thank you, Mr. Preston. I will ride over with papa some day, and we
will see if we approve of them."

Mr. Preston's brow flushed. But he affected not to perceive Lady
Harriet's haughtiness, and, turning to Molly, he said,--

"Will not you come out, Miss Gibson, and see something of the
gardens? You haven't been out at all, I think, excepting to church."

Molly did not like the idea of going out for a walk with only Mr.
Preston; yet she pined for a little fresh air, would have been glad
to see the gardens, and look at the Manor-house from different
aspects; and, besides this, much as she recoiled from Mr. Preston,
she felt sorry for him under the repulse he had just received.

While she was hesitating, and slowly tending towards consent, Lady
Harriet spoke,--

"I cannot spare Miss Gibson. If she would like to see the place, I
will bring her over some day myself."

When he had left the room, Lady Harriet said,--"I daresay it's my own
lazy selfishness has kept you indoors all day against your will. But,
at any rate, you are not to go out walking with that man. I've an
instinctive aversion to him; not entirely instinctive either; it has
some foundation in fact; and I desire you don't allow him ever to get
intimate with you. He's a very clever land-agent, and does his duty
by papa, and I don't choose to be taken up for libel; but remember
what I say!"

Then the carriage came round, and after numberless last words from
the earl--who appeared to have put off every possible direction to
the moment when he stood, like an awkward Mercury, balancing himself
on the step of the carriage--they drove back to the Towers.

"Would you rather come in and dine with us--we should send you home,
of course--or go home straight?" asked Lady Harriet of Molly. She and
her father had both been sleeping till they drew up at the bottom of
the flight of steps.

"Tell the truth, now and evermore. Truth is generally amusing, if
it's nothing else!"

"I would rather go back to Miss Brownings' at once, please," said
Molly, with a nightmare-like recollection of the last, the only
evening she had spent at the Towers.

Lord Cumnor was standing on the steps, waiting to hand his daughter
out of the carriage. Lady Harriet stopped to kiss Molly on the
forehead, and to say,--

"I shall come some day soon, and bring you a load of Miss Edgeworth's
tales, and make further acquaintance with Pecksy and Flapsy."

"No, don't, please," said Molly, taking hold of her, to detain her.
"You must not come--indeed you must not."

"Why not?"

"Because I would rather not--because I think that I ought not to have
any one coming to see me who laughs at the friends I am staying with,
and calls them names." Molly's heart beat very fast, but she meant
every word that she said.

"My dear little woman!" said Lady Harriet, bending over her and
speaking quite gravely. "I'm very sorry to have called them
names--very, very sorry to have hurt you. If I promise you to be
respectful to them in word and in deed--and in very thought, if I
can--you'll let me then, won't you?"

Molly hesitated. "I'd better go home at once; I shall only say wrong
things--and there's Lord Cumnor waiting all this time."

"Let him alone; he's very well amused hearing all the news of the day
from Brown. Then I shall come--under promise?"

So Molly drove off in solitary grandeur; and Miss Brownings' knocker
was loosened on its venerable hinges by the never-ending peal of Lord
Cumnor's footman.

They were full of welcome, full of curiosity. All through the long
day they had been missing their bright young visitor, and three or
four times in every hour they had been wondering and settling what
everybody was doing at that exact minute. What had become of Molly
during all the afternoon, had been a great perplexity to them; and
they were very much oppressed with a sense of the great honour she
had received in being allowed to spend so many hours alone with
Lady Harriet. They were, indeed, more excited by this one fact than
by all the details of the wedding, most of which they had known
of beforehand, and talked over with much perseverance during the
day. Molly began to feel as if there was some foundation for Lady
Harriet's inclination to ridicule the worship paid by the good people
of Hollingford to their liege lord, and to wonder with what tokens
of reverence they would receive Lady Harriet if she came to pay her
promised visit. She had never thought of concealing the probability
of this call until this evening; but now she felt as if it would be
better not to speak of the chance, as she was not at all sure that
the promise would be fulfilled.

Before Lady Harriet's call was paid, Molly received another visit.

Roger Hamley came riding over one day with a note from his mother,
and a wasps'-nest as a present from himself. Molly heard his powerful
voice come sounding up the little staircase, as he asked if Miss
Gibson was at home from the servant-maid at the door; and she was
half amused and half annoyed as she thought how this call of his
would give colour to Miss Browning's fancies. "I would rather never
be married at all," thought she, "than marry an ugly man,--and dear
good Mr. Roger is really ugly; I don't think one could even call him
plain." Yet Miss Brownings, who did not look upon young men as if
their natural costume was a helmet and a suit of armour, thought
Mr. Roger Hamley a very personable young fellow, as he came into
the room, his face flushed with exercise, his white teeth showing
pleasantly in the courteous bow and smile he gave to all around. He
knew the Miss Brownings slightly, and talked pleasantly to them while
Molly read Mrs. Hamley's little missive of sympathy and good wishes
relating to the wedding; then he turned to her, and though Miss
Brownings listened with all their ears, they could not find out
anything remarkable either in the words he said or the tone in which
they were spoken.

"I've brought you the wasps'-nest I promised you, Miss Gibson. There
has been no lack of such things this year; we've taken seventy-four
on my father's land alone; and one of the labourers, a poor fellow
who ekes out his wages by bee-keeping, has had a sad misfortune--the
wasps have turned the bees out of his seven hives, taken possession,
and eaten up the honey."

"What greedy little vermin!" said Miss Browning.

Molly saw Roger's eyes twinkle at the misapplication of the word; but
though he had a strong sense of humour, it never appeared to diminish
his respect for the people who amused him.

"I'm sure they deserve fire and brimstone more than the poor dear
innocent bees," said Miss Phoebe. "And then it seems so ungrateful
of mankind, who are going to feast on the honey!" She sighed over the
thought, as if it was too much for her.

While Molly finished reading her note, he explained its contents to
Miss Browning.

"My brother and I are going with my father to an agricultural meeting
at Canonbury on Thursday, and my mother desired me to say to you how
very much obliged she should be if you would spare her Miss Gibson
for the day. She was very anxious to ask for the pleasure of your
company, too, but she really is so poorly that we persuaded her to
be content with Miss Gibson, as she wouldn't scruple leaving a young
lady to amuse herself, which she would be unwilling to do if you and
your sister were there."

"I'm sure she's very kind; very. Nothing would have given us more
pleasure," said Miss Browning, drawing herself up in gratified
dignity. "Oh, yes, we quite understand, Mr. Roger; and we fully
recognize Mrs. Hamley's kind intention. We will take the will for the
deed, as the common people express it. I believe that there was an
intermarriage between the Brownings and the Hamleys, a generation or
two ago."

"I daresay there was," said Roger. "My mother is very delicate, and
obliged to humour her health, which has made her keep aloof from
society."

"Then I may go?" said Molly, sparkling with the idea of seeing her
dear Mrs. Hamley again, yet afraid of appearing too desirous of
leaving her kind old friends.

"To be sure, my dear. Write a pretty note, and tell Mrs. Hamley how
much obliged to her we are for thinking of us."

"I'm afraid I can't wait for a note," said Roger. "I must take a
message instead, for I have to meet my father at one o'clock, and
it's close upon it now."

When he was gone, Molly felt so light-hearted at the thoughts of
Thursday that she could hardly attend to what the Miss Brownings were
saying. One was talking about the pretty muslin gown which Molly had
sent to the wash only that morning, and contriving how it could be
had back again in time for her to wear; and the other, Miss Phoebe,
totally inattentive to her sister's speaking for a wonder, was piping
out a separate strain of her own, and singing Roger Hamley's praises.

"Such a fine-looking young man, and so courteous and affable. Like
the young men of our youth now, is he not, sister? And yet they all
say Mr. Osborne is the handsomest. What do you think, child?"

"I've never seen Mr. Osborne," said Molly, blushing, and hating
herself for doing so. Why was it? She had never seen him as she said.
It was only that her fancy had dwelt on him so much.

He was gone--all the gentlemen were gone before the carriage, which
came to fetch Molly on Thursday, reached Hamley Hall. But Molly was
almost glad, she was so much afraid of being disappointed. Besides,
she had her dear Mrs. Hamley the more to herself; the quiet sit in
the morning-room, talking poetry and romance; the midday saunter into
the garden, brilliant with autumnal flowers and glittering dew-drops
on the gossamer webs that stretched from scarlet to blue, and thence
to purple and yellow petals. As they were sitting at lunch, a strange
man's voice and step were heard in the hall; the door was opened,
and a young man came in, who could be no other than Osborne. He was
beautiful and languid-looking, almost as frail in appearance as
his mother, whom he strongly resembled. This seeming delicacy made
him appear older than he was. He was dressed to perfection, and
yet with easy carelessness. He came up to his mother, and stood by
her, holding her hand, while his eyes sought Molly, not boldly or
impertinently, but as if appraising her critically.

"Yes! I'm back again. Bullocks, I find, are not in my line. I
only disappointed my father in not being able to appreciate their
merits, and, I'm afraid, I didn't care to learn. And the smell was
insufferable on such a hot day."

"My dear boy, don't make apologies to me; keep them for your father.
I'm only too glad to have you back. Miss Gibson, this tall fellow is
my son Osborne, as I daresay you have guessed. Osborne--Miss Gibson.
Now, what will you have?"

He looked round the table as he sate down. "Nothing here," said he.
"Isn't there some cold game-pie? I'll ring for that."

Molly was trying to reconcile the ideal with the real. The ideal was
agile, yet powerful, with Greek features and an eagle-eye, capable
of enduring long fasting, and indifferent as to what he ate. The
real was almost effeminate in movement, though not in figure; he had
the Greek features, but his blue eyes had a cold, weary expression
in them. He was dainty in eating, and had anything but a Homeric
appetite. However, Molly's hero was not to eat more than Ivanhoe,
when he was Friar Tuck's guest; and, after all, with a little
alteration, she began to think Mr. Osborne Hamley might turn out a
poetical, if not a chivalrous hero. He was extremely attentive to
his mother, which pleased Molly, and, in return, Mrs. Hamley seemed
charmed with him to such a degree that Molly once or twice fancied
that mother and son would have been happier in her absence. Yet,
again, it struck on the shrewd, if simple girl, that Osborne was
mentally squinting at her in the conversation which was directed to
his mother. There were little turns and 'fioriture' of speech which
Molly could not help feeling were graceful antics of language not
common in the simple daily intercourse between mother and son. But
it was flattering rather than otherwise to perceive that a very fine
young man, who was a poet to boot, should think it worth while to
talk on the tight rope for her benefit. And before the afternoon was
ended, without there having been any direct conversation between
Osborne and Molly, she had reinstated him on his throne in her
imagination; indeed, she had almost felt herself disloyal to her dear
Mrs. Hamley when, in the first hour after her introduction, she had
questioned his claims on his mother's idolatry. His beauty came out
more and more, as he became animated in some discussion with her; and
all his attitudes, if a little studied, were graceful in the extreme.
Before Molly left, the squire and Roger returned from Canonbury.

"Osborne here!" said the Squire, red and panting. "Why the deuce
couldn't you tell us you were coming home? I looked about for you
everywhere, just as we were going into the ordinary. I wanted to
introduce you to Grantley, and Fox, and Lord Forrest--men from the
other side of the county, whom you ought to know; and Roger there
missed above half his dinner hunting about for you; and all the time
you'd stole away, and were quietly sitting here with the women. I
wish you'd let me know the next time you make off. I've lost half my
pleasure in looking at as fine a lot of cattle as I ever saw, with
thinking you might be having one of your old attacks of faintness."

"I should have had one, I think, if I'd stayed longer in that
atmosphere. But I'm sorry if I've caused you anxiety."

"Well! well!" said the Squire, somewhat mollified. "And Roger,
too,--there I've been sending him here and sending him there all the
afternoon."

"I didn't mind it, sir. I was only sorry you were so uneasy. I
thought Osborne had gone home, for I knew it wasn't much in his way,"
said Roger.

Molly intercepted a glance between the two brothers--a look of true
confidence and love, which suddenly made her like them both under the
aspect of relationship--new to her observation.

Roger came up to her, and sat down by her.

"Well, and how are you getting on with Huber; don't you find him very
interesting?"

"I'm afraid," said Molly, penitently, "I haven't read much. Miss
Brownings like me to talk; and, besides, there is so much to do at
home before papa comes back; and Miss Browning doesn't like me to go
without her. I know it sounds nothing, but it does take up a great
deal of time."

"When is your father coming back?"

"Next Tuesday, I believe. He cannot stay long away."

"I shall ride over and pay my respects to Mrs. Gibson," said he. "I
shall come as soon as I may. Your father has been a very kind friend
to me ever since I was a boy. And when I come, I shall expect my
pupil to have been very diligent," he concluded, smiling his kind,
pleasant smile at idle Molly.

Then the carriage came round, and she had the long solitary drive
back to Miss Brownings'. It was dark out of doors when she got there;
but Miss Phoebe was standing on the stairs, with a lighted candle
in her hand, peering into the darkness to see Molly come in.

"Oh, Molly! I thought you'd never come back. Such a piece of news!
Sister has gone to bed; she's had a headache--with the excitement,
I think; but she says it's new bread. Come upstairs softly, my
dear, and I'll tell you what it is! Who do you think has been
here,--drinking tea with us, too, in the most condescending manner?"

"Lady Harriet?" said Molly, suddenly enlightened by the word
"condescending."

"Yes. Why, how did you guess it? But, after all, her call, at any
rate in the first instance, was upon you. Oh, dear Molly! if you're
not in a hurry to go to bed, let me sit down quietly and tell you all
about it; for my heart jumps into my mouth still when I think of how
I was caught. She--that is, her ladyship--left the carriage at 'The
George,' and took to her feet to go shopping--just as you or I may
have done many a time in our lives. And sister was taking her forty
winks; and I was sitting with my gown up above my knees and my feet
on the fender, pulling out my grandmother's lace which I'd been
washing. The worst has yet to be told. I'd taken off my cap, for I
thought it was getting dusk and no one would come, and there was I in
my black silk skull-cap, when Nancy put her head in, and whispered,
'There's a lady downstairs--a real grand one, by her talk;' and in
there came my Lady Harriet, so sweet and pretty in her ways, it was
some time before I remembered I had never a cap on. Sister never
wakened; or never roused up, so to say. She says she thought it was
Nancy bringing in the tea when she heard some one moving; for her
ladyship, as soon as she saw the state of the case, came and knelt
down on the rug by me, and begged my pardon so prettily for having
followed Nancy upstairs without waiting for permission; and was so
taken by my old lace, and wanted to know how I washed it, and where
you were, and when you'd be back, and when the happy couple would be
back: till sister wakened--she's always a little bit put out, you
know, when she first wakens from her afternoon nap,--and, without
turning her head to see who it was, she said, quite sharp,--'Buzz,
buzz, buzz! When will you learn that whispering is more fidgeting
than talking out loud? I've not been able to sleep at all for the
chatter you and Nancy have been keeping up all this time.' You know
that was a little fancy of sister's, for she'd been snoring away as
naturally as could be. So I went to her, and leant over her, and said
in a low voice,--

"'Sister, it's her ladyship and me that has been conversing.'

"'Ladyship here, ladyship there! have you lost your wits, Phoebe,
that you talk such nonsense--and in your skull-cap, too!'

"By this time she was sitting up--and, looking round her, she saw
Lady Harriet, in her velvets and silks, sitting on our rug, smiling,
her bonnet off, and her pretty hair all bright with the blaze of the
fire. My word! sister was up on her feet directly; and she dropped
her curtsey, and made her excuses for sleeping, as fast as might be,
while I went off to put on my best cap, for sister might well say I
was out of my wits to go on chatting to an earl's daughter in an old
black silk skull-cap. Black silk, too! when, if I'd only known she
was coming, I might have put on my new brown silk one, lying idle in
my top drawer. And when I came back, sister was ordering tea for her
ladyship,--our tea, I mean. So I took my turn at talk, and sister
slipped out to put on her Sunday silk. But I don't think we were
quite so much at our ease with her ladyship as when I sat pulling
out my lace in my skull-cap. And she was quite struck with our tea,
and asked where we got it, for she had never tasted any like it
before; and I told her we gave only 3_s._ 4_d._ a pound for it, at
Johnson's--(sister says I ought to have told her the price of our
company-tea, which is 5_s._ a pound, only that was not what we were
drinking; for, as ill-luck would have it, we'd none of it in the
house)--and she said she would send us some of hers, all the way
from Russia or Prussia, or some out-of-the-way place, and we were to
compare and see which we liked best; and if we liked hers best, she
could get it for us at 3_s._ a pound. And she left her love for you;
and, though she was going away, you were not to forget her. Sister
thought such a message would set you up too much, and told me she
would not be chargeable for the giving it you. 'But,' I said, 'a
message is a message, and it's on Molly's own shoulders if she's set
up by it. Let us show her an example of humility, sister, though we
have been sitting cheek-by-jowl in such company.' So sister humphed,
and said she'd a headache, and went to bed. And now you may tell me
your news, my dear."

So Molly told her small events; which, interesting as they might
have been at other times to the gossip-loving and sympathetic Miss
Phoebe, were rather pale in the stronger light reflected from the
visit of an earl's daughter.




CHAPTER XV.

THE NEW MAMMA.


[Illustration (untitled)]

On Tuesday afternoon Molly returned home--to the home which was
already strange, and what Warwickshire people would call "unked,"
to her. New paint, new paper, new colours; grim servants dressed
in their best, and objecting to every change--from their master's
marriage to the new oilcloth in the hall, "which tripped 'em up, and
threw 'em down, and was cold to the feet, and smelt just abominable."
All these complaints Molly had to listen to, and it was not a
cheerful preparation for the reception which she already felt to be
so formidable.

The sound of their carriage-wheels was heard at last, and Molly went
to the front door to meet them. Her father got out first, and took
her hand and held it while he helped his bride to alight. Then he
kissed her fondly, and passed her on to his wife; but her veil was so
securely (and becomingly) fastened down, that it was some time before
Mrs. Gibson could get her lips clear to greet her new daughter. Then
there was luggage to be seen about; and both the travellers were
occupied in this, while Molly stood by trembling with excitement,
unable to help, and only conscious of Betty's rather cross looks, as
heavy box after heavy box jammed up the passage.

"Molly, my dear, show--your mamma to her room!"

Mr. Gibson had hesitated, because the question of the name by
which Molly was to call her new relation had never occurred to him
before. The colour flashed into Molly's face. Was she to call her
"mamma?"--the name long appropriated in her mind to some one else--to
her own dead mother. The rebellious heart rose against it, but she
said nothing. She led the way upstairs, Mrs. Gibson turning round,
from time to time, with some fresh direction as to which bag or trunk
she needed most. She hardly spoke to Molly till they were both in
the newly-furnished bedroom, where a small fire had been lighted by
Molly's orders.

"Now, my love, we can embrace each other in peace. O dear, how tired
I am!"--(after the embrace had been accomplished). "My spirits are so
easily affected with fatigue; but your dear papa has been kindness
itself. Dear! what an old-fashioned bed! And what a-- But it doesn't
signify. By-and-by we'll renovate the house--won't we, my dear? And
you'll be my little maid to-night, and help me to arrange a few
things, for I'm just worn out with the day's journey."

"I've ordered a sort of tea-dinner to be ready for you," said Molly.
"Shall I go and tell them to send it in?"

"I'm not sure if I can go down again to-night. It would be very
comfortable to have a little table brought in here, and sit in my
dressing-gown by this cheerful fire. But, to be sure, there's your
dear papa? I really don't think he would eat anything if I were not
there. One must not think about oneself, you know. Yes, I'll come
down in a quarter of an hour."

But Mr. Gibson had found a note awaiting him, with an immediate
summons to an old patient, dangerously ill; and, snatching a mouthful
of food while his horse was being saddled, he had to resume at once
his old habits of attention to his profession above everything.

As soon as Mrs. Gibson found that he was not likely to miss her
presence--he had eaten a very tolerable lunch of bread and cold meat
in solitude, so her fears about his appetite in her absence were not
well founded--she desired to have her meal upstairs in her own room;
and poor Molly, not daring to tell the servants of this whim, had to
carry up first a table, which, however small, was too heavy for her;
and afterwards all the choice portions of the meal, which she had
taken great pains to arrange on the table, as she had seen such
things done at Hamley, intermixed with fruit and flowers that had
that morning been sent in from various great houses where Mr. Gibson
was respected and valued. How pretty Molly had thought her handiwork
an hour or two before! How dreary it seemed as, at last released from
Mrs. Gibson's conversation, she sate down in solitude to cold tea and
the drumsticks of the chicken! No one to look at her preparations,
and admire her deft-handedness and taste! She had thought that her
father would be gratified by it, and then he had never seen it. She
had meant her cares as an offering of good-will to her stepmother,
who even now was ringing her bell to have the tray taken away, and
Miss Gibson summoned to her bedroom.

Molly hastily finished her meal, and went upstairs again.

"I feel so lonely, darling, in this strange house; do come and be
with me, and help me to unpack. I think your dear papa might have put
off his visit to Mr. Craven Smith for just this one evening."

"Mr. Craven Smith couldn't put off his dying," said Molly, bluntly.

"You droll girl!" said Mrs. Gibson, with a faint laugh. "But if this
Mr. Smith is dying, as you say, what's the use of your father's going
off to him in such a hurry? Does he expect any legacy, or anything of
that kind?"

Molly bit her lips to prevent herself from saying something
disagreeable. She only answered,--

"I don't quite know that he is dying. The man said so; and papa can
sometimes do something to make the last struggle easier. At any rate,
it's always a comfort to the family to have him."

"What dreary knowledge of death you have learned for a girl of your
age! Really, if I had heard all these details of your father's
profession, I doubt if I could have brought myself to have him!"

"He doesn't make the illness or the death; he does his best against
them. I call it a very fine thing to think of what he does or tries
to do. And you will think so, too, when you see how he is watched
for, and how people welcome him!"

"Well, don't let us talk any more of such gloomy things, to-night! I
think I shall go to bed at once, I am so tired, if you will only sit
by me till I get sleepy, darling. If you will talk to me, the sound
of your voice will soon send me off."

Molly got a book, and read her stepmother to sleep, preferring that
to the harder task of keeping up a continual murmur of speech.

Then she stole down and went into the dining-room, where the fire
was gone out; purposely neglected by the servants, to mark their
displeasure at their new mistress's having had her tea in her own
room. Molly managed to light it, however, before her father came
home, and collected and re-arranged some comfortable food for him.
Then she knelt down again on the hearth-rug, gazing into the fire in
a dreamy reverie, which had enough of sadness about it to cause the
tears to drop unnoticed from her eyes. But she jumped up, and shook
herself into brightness at the sound of her father's step.

"How is Mr. Craven Smith?" said she.

"Dead. He just recognized me. He was one of my first patients on
coming to Hollingford."

Mr. Gibson sate down in the arm-chair made ready for him, and warmed
his hands at the fire, seeming neither to need food nor talk, as he
went over a train of recollections. Then he roused himself from his
sadness, and looking round the room, he said briskly enough,--

"And where's the new mamma?"

"She was tired, and went to bed early. Oh, papa! must I call her
'mamma?'"

"I should like it," replied he, with a slight contraction of the
brows.

Molly was silent. She put a cup of tea near him; he stirred it, and
sipped it, and then he recurred to the subject.

"Why shouldn't you call her 'mamma?' I'm sure she means to do the
duty of a mother to you. We all may make mistakes, and her ways may
not be quite all at once our ways; but at any rate let us start with
a family bond between us."

What would Roger say was right?--that was the question that rose to
Molly's mind. She had always spoken of her father's new wife as Mrs.
Gibson, and had once burst out at Miss Brownings with a protestation
that she never would call her "mamma." She did not feel drawn to her
new relation by their intercourse that evening. She kept silence,
though she knew her father was expecting an answer. At last he
gave up his expectation, and turned to another subject; told about
their journey, questioned her as to the Hamleys, the Brownings,
Lady Harriet, and the afternoon they had passed together at the
Manor-house. But there was a certain hardness and constraint in his
manner, and in hers a heaviness and absence of mind. All at once she
said,--

"Papa, I will call her 'mamma!'"

He took her hand, and grasped it tight; but for an instant or two he
did not speak. Then he said,--

"You won't be sorry for it, Molly, when you come to lie as poor
Craven Smith did to-night."

For some time the murmurs and grumblings of the two elder servants
were confined to Molly's ears, then they spread to her father's, who,
to Molly's dismay, made summary work with them.

"You don't like Mrs. Gibson's ringing her bell so often, don't you?
You've been spoilt, I'm afraid; but if you don't conform to my wife's
desires, you have the remedy in your own hands, you know."

What servant ever resisted the temptation to give warning after such
a speech as that? Betty told Molly she was going to leave, in as
indifferent a manner as she could possibly assume towards the girl
whom she had tended and been about for the last sixteen years. Molly
had hitherto considered her former nurse as a fixture in the house;
she would almost as soon have thought of her father's proposing
to sever the relationship between them; and here was Betty coolly
talking over whether her next place should be in town or country. But
a great deal of this was assumed hardness. In a week or two Betty was
in floods of tears at the prospect of leaving her nursling, and would
fain have stayed and answered all the bells in the house once every
quarter of an hour. Even Mr. Gibson's masculine heart was touched by
the sorrow of the old servant, which made itself obvious to him every
time he came across her by her broken voice and her swollen eyes.

One day he said to Molly, "I wish you'd ask your mamma if Betty might
not stay, if she made a proper apology, and all that sort of thing."

"I don't much think it will be of any use," said Molly, in a mournful
voice. "I know she is writing, or has written, about some
under-housemaid at the Towers."

"Well!--all I want is peace and a decent quantity of cheerfulness
when I come home. I see enough of tears at other people's houses.
After all, Betty has been with us sixteen years--a sort of service
of the antique world. But the woman may be happier elsewhere. Do as
you like about asking mamma; only if she agrees, I shall be quite
willing."

So Molly tried her hand at making a request to that effect to Mrs.
Gibson. Her instinct told her she would be unsuccessful; but surely
favour was never refused in so soft a tone.

"My dear girl, I should never have thought of sending an old servant
away,--one who has had the charge of you from your birth, or nearly
so. I could not have had the heart to do it. She might have stayed
for ever for me, if she had only attended to all my wishes; and I am
not unreasonable, am I? But, you see, she complained; and when your
dear papa spoke to her, she gave warning; and it is quite against
my principles ever to take an apology from a servant who has given
warning."

"She is so sorry," pleaded Molly; "she says she will do anything you
wish, and attend to all your orders, if she may only stay."

"But, sweet one, you seem to forget that I cannot go against my
principles, however much I may be sorry for Betty. She should not
have given way to ill-temper. As I said before, although I never
liked her, and considered her a most inefficient servant, thoroughly
spoilt by having had no mistress for so long, I should have borne
with her--at least, I think I should--as long as I could. Now I have
all but engaged Maria, who was under-housemaid at the Towers, so
don't let me hear any more of Betty's sorrow, or anybody else's
sorrow, for I'm sure, what with your dear papa's sad stories and
other things, I'm getting quite low."

Molly was silent for a moment or two.

"Have you quite engaged Maria?" asked she.

"No--I said 'all but engaged.' Sometimes one would think you did not
hear things, dear Molly!" replied Mrs. Gibson, petulantly. "Maria
is living in a place where they don't give her as much wages as she
deserves. Perhaps they can't afford it, poor things! I'm always sorry
for poverty, and would never speak hardly of those who are not rich;
but I have offered her two pounds more than she gets at present, so I
think she'll leave. At any rate, if they increase her wages, I shall
increase my offer in proportion; so I think I'm sure to get her. Such
a genteel girl!--always brings in a letter on a salver!"

"Poor Betty!" said Molly, softly.

"Poor old soul! I hope she'll profit by the lesson, I'm sure," sighed
out Mrs. Gibson; "but it's a pity we hadn't Maria before the county
families began to call."

Mrs. Gibson had been highly gratified by the circumstance of so many
calls "from county families." Her husband was much respected; and
many ladies from various halls, courts, and houses, who had profited
by his services towards themselves and their families, thought it
right to pay his new wife the attention of a call when they drove
into Hollingford to shop. The state of expectation into which these
calls threw Mrs. Gibson rather diminished Mr. Gibson's domestic
comfort. It was awkward to be carrying hot, savoury-smelling dishes
from the kitchen to the dining-room at the very time when high-born
ladies, with noses of aristocratic refinement, might be calling.
Still more awkward was the accident which happened in consequence
of clumsy Betty's haste to open the front door to a lofty footman's
ran-tan, which caused her to set down the basket containing the dirty
plates right in his mistress's way, as she stepped gingerly through
the comparative darkness of the hall; and then the young men, leaving
the dining-room quietly enough, but bursting with long-repressed
giggle, or no longer restraining their tendency to practical joking,
no matter who might be in the passage when they made their exit. The
remedy proposed by Mrs. Gibson for all these distressing grievances
was a late dinner. The luncheon for the young men, as she observed
to her husband, might be sent into the surgery. A few elegant cold
trifles for herself and Molly would not scent the house, and she
would always take care to have some little dainty ready for him. He
acceded, but unwillingly, for it was an innovation on the habits of
a lifetime, and he felt as if he should never be able to arrange his
rounds aright with this new-fangled notion of a six o'clock dinner.

"Don't get any dainties for me, my dear; bread-and-cheese is the
chief of my diet, like it was that of the old woman's."

"I know nothing of your old woman," replied his wife; "but really I
cannot allow cheese to come beyond the kitchen."

"Then I'll eat it there," said he. "It's close to the stable-yard,
and if I come in in a hurry I can get it in a moment."

"Really, Mr. Gibson, it is astonishing to compare your appearance and
manners with your tastes. You look such a gentleman, as dear Lady
Cumnor used to say."

Then the cook left; also an old servant, though not so old a one as
Betty. The cook did not like the trouble of late dinners; and, being
a Methodist, she objected on religious grounds to trying any of
Mrs. Gibson's new receipts for French dishes. It was not scriptural,
she said. There was a deal of mention of food in the Bible; but it
was of sheep ready dressed, which meant mutton, and of wine, and
of bread-and-milk, and figs and raisins, of fatted calves, a good
well-browned fillet of veal, and such like; but it had always gone
against her conscience to cook swine-flesh and make raised pork-pies,
and now if she was to be set to cook heathen dishes after the fashion
of the Papists, she'd sooner give it all up together. So the cook
followed in Betty's track, and Mr. Gibson had to satisfy his healthy
English appetite on badly-made omelettes, rissoles, vol-au-vents,
croquets, and timbales; never being exactly sure what he was eating.

He had made up his mind before his marriage to yield in trifles,
and be firm in greater things. But the differences of opinion about
trifles arose every day, and were perhaps more annoying than if they
had related to things of more consequence. Molly knew her father's
looks as well as she knew her alphabet; his wife did not; and being
an unperceptive person, except when her own interests were dependent
upon another person's humour, never found out how he was worried by
all the small daily concessions which he made to her will or her
whims. He never allowed himself to put any regret into shape, even
in his own mind; he repeatedly reminded himself of his wife's good
qualities, and comforted himself by thinking they should work
together better as time rolled on; but he was very angry at a
bachelor great-uncle of Mr. Coxe's, who, after taking no notice of
his red-headed nephew for years, suddenly sent for him, after the old
man had partially recovered from a serious attack of illness, and
appointed him his heir, on condition that his great-nephew remained
with him during the rest of his life. This had happened almost
directly after Mr. and Mrs. Gibson's return from their wedding
journey, and once or twice since that time Mr. Gibson had found
himself wondering why the deuce old Benson could not have made
up his mind sooner, and so have rid his house of the unwelcome
presence of the young lover. To do Mr. Coxe justice, in the very
last conversation he had as a pupil with Mr. Gibson he said, with
hesitating awkwardness, that perhaps the new circumstances in which
he should be placed might make some difference with regard to Mr.
Gibson's opinion on--

"Not at all," said Mr. Gibson, quickly. "You are both of you too
young to know your own minds; and if my daughter was silly enough to
be in love, she should never have to calculate her happiness on the
chances of an old man's death. I dare say he'll disinherit you after
all. He may do, and then you'd be worse off than ever. No! go away,
and forget all this nonsense; and when you've done, come back and see
us!"

So Mr. Coxe went away, with an oath of unalterable faithfulness in
his heart; and Mr. Gibson had unwillingly to fulfil an old promise
made to a gentleman farmer in the neighbourhood a year or two before,
and to take the second son of Mr. Browne in young Coxe's place. He
was to be the last of the race of pupils, and as he was rather more
than a year younger than Molly, Mr. Gibson trusted that there would
be no repetition of the Coxe romance.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE BRIDE AT HOME.


Among the "county people" (as Mrs. Gibson termed them) who called
upon her as a bride, were the two young Mr. Hamleys. The Squire,
their father, had done his congratulations, as far as he ever
intended to do them, to Mr. Gibson himself when he came to the hall;
but Mrs. Hamley, unable to go and pay visits herself, anxious to show
attention to her kind doctor's new wife, and with perhaps a little
sympathetic curiosity as to how Molly and her stepmother got on
together, made her sons ride over to Hollingford with her cards and
apologies. They came into the newly-furnished drawing-room, looking
bright and fresh from their ride: Osborne first, as usual, perfectly
dressed for the occasion, and with the sort of fine manner which
sate so well upon him; Roger, looking like a strong-built, cheerful,
intelligent country farmer, followed in his brother's train. Mrs.
Gibson was dressed for receiving callers, and made the effect she
always intended to produce, of a very pretty woman, no longer in
first youth, but with such soft manners and such a caressing voice,
that people forgot to wonder what her real age might be. Molly was
better dressed than formerly; her stepmother saw after that. She
disliked anything old or shabby, or out of taste about her; it hurt
her eye; and she had already fidgeted Molly into a new amount of care
about the manner in which she put on her clothes, arranged her hair,
and was gloved and shod. Mrs. Gibson had tried to put her through a
course of rosemary washes and creams in order to improve her tanned
complexion; but about that Molly was either forgetful or rebellious,
and Mrs. Gibson could not well come up to the girl's bedroom every
night and see that she daubed her face and neck over with the
cosmetics so carefully provided for her. Still her appearance was
extremely improved, even to Osborne's critical eye. Roger sought
rather to discover in her looks and expression whether she was happy
or not; his mother had especially charged him to note all these
signs.

Osborne and Mrs. Gibson made themselves agreeable to each other
according to the approved fashion when a young man calls on a
middle-aged bride. They talked of the "Shakspeare and musical
glasses" of the day, each vieing with the other in their knowledge
of London topics. Molly heard fragments of their conversation in the
pauses of silence between Roger and herself. Her hero was coming
out in quite a new character; no longer literary or poetical, or
romantic, or critical, he was now full of the last new play, the
singers at the opera. He had the advantage over Mrs. Gibson, who, in
fact, only spoke of these things from hearsay, from listening to the
talk at the Towers, while Osborne had run up from Cambridge two or
three times to hear this, or to see that wonder of the season. But
she had the advantage over him in greater boldness of invention to
eke out her facts; and besides she had more skill in the choice and
arrangement of her words, so as to make it appear as if the opinions
that were in reality quotations, were formed by herself from actual
experience or personal observation; such as, in speaking of the
mannerisms of a famous Italian singer, she would ask,--


[Illustration: SHAKSPEARE AND THE MUSICAL GLASSES.]


"Did you observe her constant trick of heaving her shoulders and
clasping her hands together before she took a high note?"--which was
so said as to imply that Mrs. Gibson herself had noticed this trick.
Molly, who had a pretty good idea by this time of how her stepmother
had passed the last year of her life, listened with no small
bewilderment to this conversation; but at length decided that she
must misunderstand what they were saying, as she could not gather up
the missing links for the necessity of replying to Roger's questions
and remarks. Osborne was not the same Osborne he was when with his
mother at the Hall.

Roger saw Molly glancing at his brother.

"You think my brother looking ill?" said he, lowering his voice.

"No--not exactly."

"He is not well. Both my father and I are anxious about him.
That run on the Continent did him harm, instead of good; and his
disappointment at his examination has told upon him, I'm afraid."

"I was not thinking he looked ill; only changed somehow."

"He says he must go back to Cambridge soon. Possibly it may do him
good; and I shall be off next week. This is a farewell visit to you,
as well as one of congratulation to Mrs. Gibson."

"Your mother will feel your both going away, won't she? But of course
young men will always have to live away from home."

"Yes," he replied. "Still she feels it a good deal; and I'm not
satisfied about her health either. You will go out and see her
sometimes, will you? she is very fond of you."

"If I may," said Molly, unconsciously glancing at her stepmother. She
had an uncomfortable instinct that, in spite of Mrs. Gibson's own
perpetual flow of words, she could, and did, hear everything that
fell from Molly's lips.

"Do you want any more books?" said he. "If you do, make a list out,
and send it to my mother before I leave, next Tuesday. After I am
gone, there will be no one to go into the library and pick them out."

As soon as they had left, Mrs. Gibson began her usual comments on the
departed visitors.

"I do like that Osborne Hamley! What a nice fellow he is! Somehow,
I always do like eldest sons. He will have the estate, won't he? I
shall ask your dear papa to encourage him to come about the house. He
will be a very good, very pleasant acquaintance for you and Cynthia.
The other is but a loutish young fellow, to my mind; there is no
aristocratic bearing about him. I suppose he takes after his mother,
who is but a parvenue, I've heard them say at the Towers."

Molly was spiteful enough to have great pleasure in saying,--

"I think I've heard her father was a Russian merchant, and imported
tallow and hemp. Mr. Osborne Hamley is extremely like her."

"Indeed! But there's no calculating these things. Anyhow, he is the
perfect gentleman in appearance and manner. The estate is entailed,
is it not?"

"I know nothing about it," said Molly.

A short silence ensued. Then Mrs. Gibson said,--

"Do you know, I almost think I must get dear papa to give a little
dinner-party, and ask Mr. Osborne Hamley? I should like to have him
feel at home in this house. It would be something cheerful for him
after the dulness and solitude of Hamley Hall. For the old people
don't visit much, I believe?"

"He's going back to Cambridge next week," said Molly.

"Is he? Well, then, we'll put off our little dinner till Cynthia
comes home. I should like to have some young society for her, poor
darling, when she returns."

"When is she coming?" said Molly, who had always a longing curiosity
for this same Cynthia's return.

"Oh! I'm not sure; perhaps at the new year--perhaps not till Easter.
I must get this drawing-room all new furnished first; and then I mean
to fit up her room and yours just alike. They are just the same size,
only on opposite sides of the passage."

"Are you going to new-furnish that room?" said Molly, in astonishment
at the never-ending changes.

"Yes; and yours, too, darling; so don't be jealous."

"Oh, please, mamma, not mine," said Molly, taking in the idea for the
first time.

"Yes, dear! You shall have yours done as well. A little French bed,
and a new paper, and a pretty carpet, and a dressed-up toilet-table
and glass, will make it look quite a different place."

"But I don't want it to look different. I like it as it is. Pray
don't do anything to it."

"What nonsense, child! I never heard anything more ridiculous!
Most girls would be glad to get rid of furniture only fit for the
lumber-room."

"It was my own mamma's before she was married," said Molly, in a
very low voice; bringing out this last plea unwillingly, but with a
certainty that it would not be resisted.

Mrs. Gibson paused for a moment before she replied:

"It's very much to your credit that you should have such feelings,
I'm sure. But don't you think sentiment may be carried too far? Why,
we should have no new furniture at all, and should have to put up
with worm-eaten horrors. Besides, my dear, Hollingford will seem very
dull to Cynthia, after pretty, gay France, and I want to make the
first impressions attractive. I've a notion I can settle her down
near here; and I want her to come in a good temper; for, between
ourselves, my dear, she is a little, leetle wilful. You need not
mention this to your papa."

"But can't you do Cynthia's room, and not mine? Please let mine
alone."

"No, indeed! I couldn't agree to that. Only think what would be said
of me by everybody; petting my own child and neglecting my husband's!
I couldn't bear it."

"No one need know."

"In such a tittle-tattle place as Hollingford! Really, Molly, you are
either very stupid or very obstinate, or else you don't care what
hard things may be said about me: and all for a selfish fancy of
your own! No! I owe myself the justice of acting in this matter as I
please. Every one shall know I'm not a common stepmother. Every penny
I spend on Cynthia I shall spend on you too; so it's no use talking
any more about it."

So Molly's little white dimity bed, her old-fashioned chest of
drawers, and her other cherished relics of her mother's maiden-days,
were consigned to the lumber-room; and after a while, when Cynthia
and her great French boxes had come home, the old furniture that had
filled up the space required for the fresh importation of trunks,
disappeared likewise into the same room.

All this time the family at the Towers had been absent; Lady Cumnor
had been ordered to Bath for the early part of the winter, and her
family were with her there. On dull rainy days, Mrs. Gibson used to
bethink her of missing "the Cumnors," for so she had taken to calling
them since her position had become more independent of theirs. It
marked a distinction between her intimacy in the family, and the
reverential manner in which the townspeople were accustomed to speak
of "the earl and the countess." Both Lady Cumnor and Lady Harriet
wrote to their "dear Clare" from time to time. The former had
generally some commissions that she wished to have executed at the
Towers, or in the town; and no one could do them so well as Clare,
who was acquainted with all the tastes and ways of the countess.
These commissions were the cause of various bills for flys and cars
from the George Inn. Mr. Gibson pointed out this consequence to
his wife; but she, in return, bade him remark that a present of
game was pretty sure to follow upon the satisfactory execution of
Lady Cumnor's wishes. Somehow, Mr. Gibson did not quite like this
consequence either; but he was silent about it, at any rate. Lady
Harriet's letters were short and amusing. She had that sort of regard
for her old governess which prompted her to write from time to time,
and to feel glad when the half-voluntary task was accomplished. So
there was no real outpouring of confidence, but enough news of the
family and gossip of the place she was in, as she thought would
make Clare feel that she was not forgotten by her former pupils,
intermixed with moderate but sincere expressions of regard. How
those letters were quoted and referred to by Mrs. Gibson in her
conversations with the Hollingford ladies! She had found out their
effect at Ashcombe; and it was not less at Hollingford. But she was
rather perplexed at kindly messages to Molly, and at inquiries as
to how the Miss Brownings liked the tea she had sent; and Molly
had first to explain, and then to narrate at full length, all the
occurrences of the afternoon at Ashcombe Manor-house, and Lady
Harriet's subsequent call upon her at Miss Brownings'.

"What nonsense!" said Mrs. Gibson, with some annoyance. "Lady Harriet
only went to see you out of a desire of amusement. She would only
make fun of Miss Brownings, and those two will be quoting her and
talking about her, just as if she was their intimate friend."

"I don't think she did make fun of them. She really seemed as if she
had been very kind."

"And you suppose you know her ways better than I do who have known
her these fifteen years? I tell you she turns every one into ridicule
who does not belong to her set. Why, she used always to speak of Miss
Brownings as 'Pecksy and Flapsy.'"

"She promised me she would not," said Molly driven to bay.

"Promised you!--Lady Harriet? What do you mean?"

"Only--she spoke of them as Pecksy and Flapsy--and when she talked of
coming to call on me at their house, I asked her not to come if she
was going to--to make fun of them."

"Upon my word! with all my long acquaintance with Lady Harriet, I
should never have ventured on such impertinence."

"I didn't mean it as impertinence," said Molly sturdily. "And I don't
think Lady Harriet took it as such."

"You can't know anything about it. She can put on any kind of
manner."

Just then Squire Hamley came in. It was his first call; and Mrs.
Gibson gave him a graceful welcome, and was quite ready to accept
his apology for its tardiness, and to assure him that she quite
understood the pressure of business on every land-owner who farmed
his own estate. But no such apology was made. He shook her hand
heartily, as a mark of congratulation on her good fortune in having
secured such a prize as his friend Gibson, but said nothing about his
long neglect of duty. Molly, who by this time knew the few strong
expressions of his countenance well, was sure that something was the
matter, and that he was very much disturbed. He hardly attended to
Mrs. Gibson's fluent opening of conversation, for she had already
determined to make a favourable impression on the father of the
handsome young man who was heir to an estate, besides his own
personal agreeableness; but he turned to Molly and, addressing her,
said--almost in a low voice, as if he was making a confidence to her
that he did not intend Mrs. Gibson to hear,--

"Molly, we are all wrong at home! Osborne has lost the fellowship
at Trinity he went back to try for. Then he has gone and failed
miserably in his degree, after all that he said, and that his mother
said; and I, like a fool, went and boasted about my clever son. I
can't understand it. I never expected anything extraordinary from
Roger; but Osborne--! And then it has thrown madam into one of her
bad fits of illness; and she seems to have a fancy for you, child!
Your father came to see her this morning. Poor thing, she's very
poorly, I'm afraid; and she told him how she should like to have you
about her, and he said I might fetch you. You'll come, won't you, my
dear? She's not a poor woman, such as many people think it's the only
charity to be kind to, but she's just as forlorn of woman's care as
if she was poor--worse, I daresay."

"I'll be ready in ten minutes," said Molly, much touched by the
squire's words and manner, never thinking of asking her stepmother's
consent, now that she had heard that her father had given his. As she
rose to leave the room, Mrs. Gibson, who had only half heard what the
Squire had said, and was a little affronted at the exclusiveness of
his confidence, said,--"My dear, where are you going?"

"Mrs. Hamley wants me, and papa says I may go," said Molly; and
almost at the same time the Squire replied,--

"My wife is ill, and as she's very fond of your daughter, she begged
Mr. Gibson to allow her to come to the Hall for a little while, and
he kindly said she might, and I'm come to fetch her."

"Stop a minute, darling," said Mrs. Gibson to Molly--a slight cloud
over her countenance, in spite of her caressing word. "I am sure dear
papa quite forgot that you were to go out with me to-night, to visit
people," continued she, addressing herself to the Squire, "with whom
I am quite unacquainted--and it is very uncertain if Mr. Gibson can
return in time to accompany me--so, you see, I cannot allow Molly to
go with you."

"I shouldn't have thought it would have signified. Brides are always
brides, I suppose; and it's their part to be timid; but I shouldn't
have thought it--in this case. And my wife sets her heart on things,
as sick people do. Well, Molly" (in a louder tone, for these
foregoing sentences were spoken _sotto voce_), "we must put it off
till to-morrow: and it's our loss, not yours," he continued, as
he saw the reluctance with which she slowly returned to her place.
"You'll be as gay as can be to-night, I daresay--"

"No, I shall not," broke in Molly. "I never wanted to go, and now I
shall want it less than ever."

"Hush, my dear," said Mrs. Gibson; and, addressing the Squire, she
added, "The visiting here is not all one could wish for so young a
girl--no young people, no dances, nothing of gaiety; but it is wrong
in you, Molly, to speak against such kind friends of your father's as
I understand these Cockerells are. Don't give so bad an impression of
yourself to the kind Squire."

"Let her alone! let her alone!" quoth he. "I see what she means.
She'd rather come and be in my wife's sick-room than go out for this
visit to-night. Is there no way of getting her off?"

"None whatever," said Mrs. Gibson. "An engagement is an engagement
with me; and I consider that she is not only engaged to Mrs.
Cockerell, but to me--bound to accompany me, in my husband's
absence."

The Squire was put out; and when he was put out he had a trick of
placing his hands on his knees and whistling softly to himself. Molly
knew this phase of his displeasure, and only hoped he would confine
himself to this wordless expression of annoyance. It was pretty hard
work for her to keep the tears out of her eyes; and she endeavoured
to think of something else, rather than dwell on regrets and
annoyances. She heard Mrs. Gibson talking on in a sweet monotone, and
wished to attend to what she was saying, but the Squire's visible
annoyance struck sharper on her mind. At length, after a pause of
silence, he started up, and said,--

"Well! it's no use. Poor madam; she won't like it. She'll be
disappointed! But it's but for one evening!--but for one evening! She
may come to-morrow, mayn't she? Or will the dissipation of such an
evening as she describes, be too much for her?"

There was a touch of savage irony in his manner which frightened Mrs.
Gibson into good behaviour.

"She shall be ready at any time you name. I am so sorry: my foolish
shyness is in fault, I believe; but still you must acknowledge that
an engagement is an engagement."

"Did I ever say an engagement was an elephant, madam? However,
there's no use saying any more about it, or I shall forget my
manners. I'm an old tyrant, and she--lying there in bed, poor
girl--has always given me my own way. So you'll excuse me, Mrs.
Gibson, won't you; and let Molly come along with me at ten to-morrow
morning?"

"Certainly," said Mrs. Gibson, smiling. But when his back was turned,
she said to Molly,--

"Now, my dear, I must never have you exposing me to the ill-manners
of such a man again! I don't call him a squire; I call him a boor,
or a yeoman at best. You must not go on accepting or rejecting
invitations as if you were an independent young lady, Molly. Pay me
the respect of a reference to my wishes another time, if you please,
my dear!"

"Papa had said I might go," said Molly, choking a little.

"As I am now your mamma, your references must be to me, for the
future. But as you are to go you may as well look well dressed. I
will lend you my new shawl for this visit, if you like it, and my set
of green ribbons. I am always indulgent when proper respect is paid
to me. And in such a house as Hamley Hall, no one can tell who may be
coming and going, even if there is sickness in the family."

"Thank you. But I don't want the shawl and the ribbons, please: there
will be nobody there except the family. There never is, I think; and
now that she is so ill"--Molly was on the point of crying at the
thought of her friend lying ill and lonely, and looking for her
arrival. Moreover, she was sadly afraid lest the Squire had gone off
with the idea that she did not want to come--that she preferred that
stupid, stupid party at the Cockerells'. Mrs. Gibson, too, was sorry;
she had an uncomfortable consciousness of having given way to temper
before a stranger, and a stranger, too, whose good opinion she had
meant to cultivate; and she was also annoyed at Molly's tearful face.

"What can I do for you, to bring you back into good temper?" she
said. "First, you insist upon your knowing Lady Harriet better than
I do--I, who have known her for eighteen or nineteen years at least.
Then you jump at invitations without ever consulting me, or thinking
of how awkward it would be for me to go stumping into a drawing-room
all by myself; following my new name, too, which always makes me feel
uncomfortable, it is such a sad come-down after Kirkpatrick! And
then, when I offer you some of the prettiest things I have got, you
say it does not signify how you are dressed. What can I do to please
you, Molly? I, who delight in nothing more than peace in a family, to
see you sitting there with despair upon your face?"

Molly could stand it no longer; she went upstairs to her own
room--her own smart new room, which hardly yet seemed a familiar
place; and began to cry so heartily and for so long a time, that she
stopped at length for very weariness. She thought of Mrs. Hamley
wearying for her; of the old Hall whose very quietness might become
oppressive to an ailing person; of the trust the Squire had had in
her that she would come off directly with him. And all this oppressed
her much more than the querulousness of her stepmother's words.




CHAPTER XVII.

TROUBLE AT HAMLEY HALL.


If Molly thought that peace dwelt perpetually at Hamley Hall
she was sorely mistaken. Something was out of tune in the whole
establishment; and, for a very unusual thing, the common irritation
seemed to have produced a common bond. All the servants were old in
their places, and were told by some one of the family, or gathered,
from the unheeded conversation carried on before them, everything
that affected master or mistress or either of the young gentlemen.
Any one of them could have told Molly that the grievance which lay at
the root of everything, was the amount of the bills run up by Osborne
at Cambridge, and which, now that all chance of his obtaining a
fellowship was over, came pouring down upon the Squire. But Molly,
confident of being told by Mrs. Hamley herself anything which she
wished her to hear, encouraged no confidences from any one else.

She was struck with the change in "madam's" look as soon as she
caught sight of her in the darkened room, lying on the sofa in her
dressing-room, all dressed in white, which almost rivalled the white
wanness of her face. The Squire ushered Molly in with,--

"Here she is at last!" and Molly had scarcely imagined that he had so
much variety in the tones of his voice--the beginning of the sentence
was spoken in a loud congratulatory manner, while the last words
were scarcely audible. He had seen the death-like pallor on his
wife's face; not a new sight, and one which had been presented to him
gradually enough, but which was now always giving him a fresh shock.
It was a lovely tranquil winter's day; every branch and every twig
on the trees and shrubs was glittering with drops of the sun-melted
hoar-frost; a robin was perched on a holly-bush, piping cheerily; but
the blinds were down, and out of Mrs. Hamley's windows nothing of all
this was to be seen. There was even a large screen placed between
her and the wood-fire, to keep off that cheerful blaze. Mrs. Hamley
stretched out one hand to Molly, and held hers firm; with the other
she shaded her eyes.

"She is not so well this morning," said the Squire, shaking his head.
"But never fear, my dear one; here's the doctor's daughter, nearly
as good as the doctor himself. Have you had your medicine? Your
beef-tea?" he continued, going about on heavy tiptoe and peeping into
every empty cup and glass. Then he returned to the sofa; looked at
her for a minute or two, and then softly kissed her, and told Molly
he would leave her in charge.

As if Mrs. Hamley was afraid of Molly's remarks or questions, she
began in her turn a hasty system of interrogatories.

"Now, dear child, tell me all; it's no breach of confidence, for I
shan't mention it again, and I shan't be here long. How does it all
go on--the new mother, the good resolutions? let me help you if I
can. I think with a girl I could have been of use--a mother does not
know boys. But tell me anything you like and will; don't be afraid of
details."

Even with Molly's small experience of illness she saw how much of
restless fever there was in this speech; and instinct, or some
such gift, prompted her to tell a long story of many things--the
wedding-day, her visit to Miss Brownings', the new furniture, Lady
Harriet, &c., all in an easy flow of talk which was very soothing
to Mrs. Hamley, inasmuch as it gave her something to think about
beyond her own immediate sorrows. But Molly did not speak of her own
grievances, nor of the new domestic relationship. Mrs. Hamley noticed
this.

"And you and Mrs. Gibson get on happily together?"

"Not always," said Molly. "You know we didn't know much of each other
before we were put to live together."

"I didn't like what the Squire told me last night. He was very
angry."

That sore had not yet healed over; but Molly resolutely kept silence,
beating her brains to think of some other subject of conversation.

"Ah! I see, Molly," said Mrs. Hamley; "you won't tell me your
sorrows, and yet, perhaps, I could have done you some good."

"I don't like," said Molly, in a low voice. "I think papa wouldn't
like it. And, besides, you have helped me so much--you and Mr.
Roger Hamley. I often think of the things he said; they come in so
usefully, and are such a strength to me."

"Ah, Roger! yes. He is to be trusted. Oh, Molly! I've a great deal
to say to you myself, only not now. I must have my medicine and try
to go to sleep. Good girl! You are stronger than I am, and can do
without sympathy."

Molly was taken to another room; the maid who conducted her to it
told her that Mrs. Hamley had not wished her to have her nights
disturbed, as they might very probably have been if she had been in
her former sleeping-room. In the afternoon Mrs. Hamley sent for her,
and with the want of reticence common to invalids, especially to
those suffering from long and depressing maladies, she told Molly of
the family distress and disappointment.

She made Molly sit down near her on a little stool, and, holding her
hand, and looking into her eyes to catch her spoken sympathy from
their expression quicker than she could from her words, she said,--

"Osborne has so disappointed us! I cannot understand it yet. And the
Squire was so terribly angry! I cannot think how all the money was
spent--advances through money-lenders, besides bills. The Squire
does not show me how angry he is now, because he's afraid of another
attack; but I know how angry he is. You see he has been spending ever
so much money in reclaiming that land at Upton Common, and is very
hard pressed himself. But it would have doubled the value of the
estate, and so we never thought anything of economies which would
benefit Osborne in the long run. And now the Squire says he must
mortgage some of the land; and you can't think how it cuts him to
the heart. He sold a great deal of timber to send the two boys to
college. Osborne--oh! what a dear, innocent boy he was: he was the
heir, you know; and he was so clever, every one said he was sure of
honours and a fellowship, and I don't know what all; and he did get
a scholarship, and then all went wrong. I don't know how. That is
the worst. Perhaps the Squire wrote too angrily, and that stopped up
confidence. But he might have told me. He would have done, I think,
Molly, if he had been here, face to face with me. But the Squire, in
his anger, told him not to show his face at home till he had paid off
the debts he had incurred out of his allowance. Out of two hundred
and fifty a year to pay off more than nine hundred, one way or
another! And not to come home till then! Perhaps Roger will have
debts too! He had but two hundred; but, then, he was not the eldest
son. The Squire has given orders that the men are to be turned off
the draining-works; and I lie awake thinking of their poor families
this wintry weather. But what shall we do? I've never been strong,
and, perhaps, I've been extravagant in my habits; and there were
family traditions as to expenditure, and the reclaiming of this land.
Oh! Molly, Osborne was such a sweet little baby, and such a loving
boy: so clever, too! You know I read you some of his poetry: now,
could a person who wrote like that do anything very wrong? And yet
I'm afraid he has."

"Don't you know, at all, how the money has gone?" asked Molly.

"No! not at all. That's the sting. There are tailors' bills,
and bills for book-binding and wine and pictures--those come
to four or five hundred; and though this expenditure is
extraordinary--inexplicable to such simple folk as we are--yet it
may be only the luxury of the present day. But the money for which
he will give no account,--of which, indeed, we only heard through
the Squire's London agents, who found out that certain disreputable
attorneys were making inquiries as to the entail of the estate;--oh!
Molly, worse than all--I don't know how to bring myself to tell
you--as to the age and health of the Squire, his dear father"--(she
began to sob almost hysterically; yet she would go on talking, in
spite of Molly's efforts to stop her)--"who held him in his arms, and
blessed him, even before I had kissed him; and thought always so much
of him as his heir and first-born darling. How he has loved him! How
I have loved him! I sometimes have thought of late that we've almost
done that good Roger injustice."

"No! I'm sure you've not: only look at the way he loves you. Why, you
are his first thought: he may not speak about it, but any one may see
it. And dear, dear Mrs. Hamley," said Molly, determined to say out
all that was in her mind now that she had once got the word, "don't
you think that it would be better not to misjudge Mr. Osborne Hamley?
We don't know what he has done with the money: he is so good (is he
not?) that he may have wanted it to relieve some poor person--some
tradesman, for instance, pressed by creditors--some--"

"You forget, dear," said Mrs. Hamley, smiling a little at the girl's
impetuous romance, but sighing the next instant, "that all the other
bills come from tradesmen, who complain piteously of being kept out
of their money."

Molly was nonplussed for the moment; but then she said,--

"I daresay they imposed upon him. I'm sure I've heard stories of
young men being made regular victims of by the shopkeepers in great
towns."

"You're a great darling, child," said Mrs. Hamley, comforted by
Molly's strong partisanship, unreasonable and ignorant though it was.

"And, besides," continued Molly, "some one must be acting wrongly in
Osborne's--Mr. Osborne Hamley's, I mean--I can't help saying Osborne
sometimes, but, indeed, I always think of him as Mr. Osborne--"

"Never mind, Molly, what you call him; only go on talking. It
seems to do me good to hear the hopeful side taken. The Squire has
been so hurt and displeased: strange-looking men coming into the
neighbourhood, too, questioning the tenants, and grumbling about the
last fall of timber, as if they were calculating on the Squire's
death."

"That's just what I was going to speak about. Doesn't it show that
they are bad men? and would bad men scruple to impose upon him, and
to tell lies in his name, and to ruin him?"

"Don't you see, you only make him out weak, instead of wicked?"

"Yes; perhaps I do. But I don't think he is weak. You know yourself,
dear Mrs. Hamley, how very clever he really is. Besides, I would
rather he was weak than wicked. Weak people may find themselves all
at once strong in heaven, when they see things quite clearly; but I
don't think the wicked will turn themselves into virtuous people all
at once."

"I think I've been very weak, Molly," said Mrs. Hamley, stroking
Molly's curls affectionately. "I've made such an idol of my beautiful
Osborne; and he turns out to have feet of clay, not strong enough to
stand firm on the ground. And that's the best view of his conduct,
too!"

What with his anger against his son, and his anxiety about his wife;
the difficulty of raising the money immediately required, and his
irritation at the scarce-concealed inquiries made by strangers as to
the value of his property, the poor Squire was in a sad state. He
was angry and impatient with every one who came near him; and then
was depressed at his own violent temper and unjust words. The old
servants, who, perhaps, cheated him in many small things, were
beautifully patient under his upbraidings. They could understand
bursts of passion, and knew the cause of his variable moods as well
as he did himself. The butler, who was accustomed to argue with his
master about every fresh direction as to his work, now nudged Molly
at dinner-time to make her eat of some dish which she had just been
declining, and explained his conduct afterwards as follows:--

"You see, miss, me and cook had planned a dinner as would tempt
master to eat; but when you say, 'No, thank you,' when I hand you
anything, master never so much as looks at it. But if you takes a
thing, and eats with a relish, why first he waits, and then he looks,
and by-and-by he smells; and then he finds out as he's hungry, and
falls to eating as natural as a kitten takes to mewing. That's the
reason, miss, as I gave you a nudge and a wink, which no one knows
better nor me was not manners."

Osborne's name was never mentioned during these cheerless meals. The
Squire asked Molly questions about Hollingford people, but did not
seem much to attend to her answers. He used also to ask her every day
how she thought that his wife was; but if Molly told the truth--that
every day seemed to make her weaker and weaker--he was almost savage
with the girl. He could not bear it; and he would not. Nay, once he
was on the point of dismissing Mr. Gibson because he insisted on a
consultation with Dr. Nicholls, the great physician of the county.

"It's nonsense thinking her so ill as that--you know it's only the
delicacy she's had for years; and if you can't do her any good in
such a simple case--no pain--only weakness and nervousness--it is a
simple case, eh?--don't look in that puzzled way, man!--you'd better
give her up altogether, and I'll take her to Bath or Brighton,
or somewhere for change, for in my opinion it's only moping and
nervousness."

But the Squire's bluff florid face was pinched with anxiety, and worn
with the effort of being deaf to the footsteps of fate as he said
these words which belied his fears.

Mr. Gibson replied very quietly,--

"I shall go on coming to see her, and I know you'll not forbid my
visits. But I shall bring Dr. Nicholls with me the next time I come.
I may be mistaken in my treatment; and I wish to God he may say I am
mistaken in my apprehensions."

"Don't tell me them! I cannot bear them!" cried the Squire. "Of
course we must all die; and she must too. But the cleverest doctor
in England shan't go about coolly meting out the life of such as her.
I daresay I shall die first. I hope I shall. But I'll knock any one
down who speaks to me of death sitting within me. And, besides, I
think all doctors are ignorant quacks, pretending to knowledge they
haven't got. Ay, you may smile at me. I don't care. Unless you can
tell me I shall die first, neither you nor your Dr. Nicholls shall
come prophesying and croaking about this house."

Mr. Gibson went away, heavy at heart from the thought of Mrs.
Hamley's approaching death, but thinking little enough of the
Squire's speeches. He had almost forgotten them, in fact, when about
nine o'clock that evening, a groom rode in from Hamley Hall in hot
haste, with a note from the Squire.


   DEAR GIBSON,--

   For God's sake forgive me if I was rude to-day. She is
   much worse. Come and spend the night here. Write for
   Nicholls, and all the physicians you want. Write before
   you start off. They may give her ease. There were
   Whitworth doctors much talked of in my youth for curing
   people given up by the regular doctors; can't you get one
   of them? I put myself in your hands. Sometimes I think it
   is the turning point, and she'll rally after this bout. I
   trust all to you.

   Yours ever,

   R. HAMLEY.

   P.S.--Molly is a treasure.--God help me!


Of course Mr. Gibson went; for the first time since his marriage
cutting short Mrs. Gibson's querulous lamentations over her life,
as involved in that of a doctor called out at all hours of day and
night.

He brought Mrs. Hamley through this attack; and for a day or two the
Squire's alarm and gratitude made him docile in Mr. Gibson's hands.
Then he returned to the idea of its being a crisis through which his
wife had passed; and that she was now on the way to recovery. But
the day after the consultation with Dr. Nicholls, Mr. Gibson said to
Molly,--

"Molly! I've written to Osborne and Roger. Do you know Osborne's
address?"

"No, papa. He's in disgrace. I don't know if the Squire knows; and
she has been too ill to write."

"Never mind. I'll enclose it to Roger; whatever those lads may be to
others, there's as strong brotherly love as ever I saw, between the
two. Roger will know. And, Molly, they are sure to come home as soon
as they hear my report of their mother's state. I wish you'd tell the
Squire what I've done. It's not a pleasant piece of work; and I'll
tell madam myself in my own way. I'd have told him if he'd been at
home; but you say he was obliged to go to Ashcombe on business."

"Quite obliged. He was so sorry to miss you. But, papa, he will be so
angry! You don't know how mad he is against Osborne."

Molly dreaded the Squire's anger when she gave him her father's
message. She had seen quite enough of the domestic relations of
the Hamley family to understand that, underneath his old-fashioned
courtesy, and the pleasant hospitality he showed to her as a guest,
there was a strong will, and a vehement passionate temper, along with
that degree of obstinacy in prejudices (or "opinions," as he would
have called them) so common to those who have, neither in youth nor
in manhood, mixed largely with their kind. She had listened, day
after day, to Mrs. Hamley's plaintive murmurs as to the deep disgrace
in which Osborne was being held by his father--the prohibition of his
coming home; and she hardly knew how to begin to tell him that the
letter summoning Osborne had already been sent off.

Their dinners were tÉte-ł-tÉte. The Squire tried to make them
pleasant to Molly, feeling deeply grateful to her for the soothing
comfort she was to his wife. He made merry speeches, which sank
away into silence, and at which they each forgot to smile. He
ordered up rare wines, which she did not care for, but tasted out of
complaisance. He noticed that one day she had eaten some brown beurrÄ
pears as if she liked them; and as his trees had not produced many
this year, he gave directions that this particular kind should be
sought for through the neighbourhood. Molly felt that, in many ways,
he was full of good-will towards her; but it did not diminish her
dread of touching on the one sore point in the family. However, it
had to be done, and that without delay.

The great log was placed on the after-dinner fire, the hearth swept
up, the ponderous candles snuffed, and then the door was shut and
Molly and the Squire were left to their dessert. She sat at the side
of the table in her old place. That at the head was vacant; yet, as
no orders had been given to the contrary, the plate and glasses and
napkin were always arranged as regularly and methodically as if Mrs.
Hamley would come in as usual. Indeed, sometimes, when the door
by which she used to enter was opened by any chance, Molly caught
herself looking round as if she expected to see the tall, languid
figure in the elegant draperies of rich silk and soft lace, which
Mrs. Hamley was wont to wear of an evening.

This evening, it struck her, as a new thought of pain, that into
that room she would come no more. She had fixed to give her father's
message at this very point of time; but something in her throat
choked her, and she hardly knew how to govern her voice. The Squire
got up and went to the broad fireplace, to strike into the middle of
the great log, and split it up into blazing, sparkling pieces. His
back was towards her. Molly began, "When papa was here to-day, he
bade me tell you he had written to Mr. Roger Hamley to say that--that
he thought he had better come home; and he enclosed a letter to Mr.
Osborne Hamley to say the same thing."

The Squire put down the poker, but he still kept his back to Molly.

"He sent for Osborne and Roger?" he asked, at length.

Molly answered, "Yes."

Then there was a dead silence, which Molly thought would never end.
The Squire had placed his two hands on the high chimney-piece, and
stood leaning over the fire.

"Roger would have been down from Cambridge on the 18th," said he.
"And he has sent for Osborne, too! Did he know,"--he continued,
turning round to Molly, with something of the fierceness she had
anticipated in voice and look. In another moment he had dropped his
voice. "It's right, quite right. I understand. It has come at length.
Come! come! Osborne has brought it on, though," with a fresh access
of anger in his tones. "She might have" (some word Molly could not
hear--she thought it sounded like "lingered") "but for that. I can't
forgive him; I cannot."

And then he suddenly left the room. While Molly sat there still, very
sad in her sympathy with all, he put his head in again:--

"Go to her, my dear; I cannot--not just yet. But I will soon. Just
this bit; and after that I won't lose a moment. You're a good girl.
God bless you!"

It is not to be supposed that Molly had remained all this time at the
Hall without interruption. Once or twice her father had brought her
a summons home. Molly thought she could perceive that he had brought
it unwillingly; in fact, it was Mrs. Gibson that had sent for her,
almost, as it were, to preserve a "right of way" through her actions.

"You shall come back to-morrow, or the next day," her father had
said. "But mamma seems to think people will put a bad construction on
your being so much away from home so soon after our marriage."

"Oh, papa, I'm afraid Mrs. Hamley will miss me! I do so like being
with her."

"I don't think it is likely she will miss you as much as she would
have done a month or two ago. She sleeps so much now, that she is
scarcely conscious of the lapse of time. I'll see that you come back
here again in a day or two."

So out of the silence and the soft melancholy of the Hall Molly
returned into the all-pervading element of chatter and gossip at
Hollingford. Mrs. Gibson received her kindly enough. Once she had a
smart new winter bonnet ready to give her as a present; but she did
not care to hear any particulars about the friends whom Molly had
just left; and her few remarks on the state of affairs at the Hall
jarred terribly on the sensitive Molly.

"What a time she lingers! Your papa never expected she would last
half so long after that attack. It must be very wearing work to them
all; I declare you look quite another creature since you were there.
One can only wish it mayn't last, for their sakes."

"You don't know how the Squire values every minute," said Molly.

"Why, you say she sleeps a great deal, and doesn't talk much when
she's awake, and there's not the slightest hope for her. And yet, at
such times, people are kept on the tenter-hooks with watching and
waiting. I know it by my dear Kirkpatrick. There really were days
when I thought it never would end. But we won't talk any more of such
dismal things; you've had quite enough of them, I'm sure, and it
always makes me melancholy to hear of illness and death; and yet your
papa seems sometimes as if he could talk of nothing else. I'm going
to take you out to-night, though, and that will give you something
of a change; and I've been getting Miss Rose to trim up one of my
old gowns for you; it's too tight for me. There's some talk of
dancing,--it's at Mrs. Edwards'."

"Oh, mamma, I cannot go!" cried Molly. "I've been so much with her;
and she may be suffering so, or even dying--and I to be dancing!"

"Nonsense! You're no relation, so you need not feel it so much. I
wouldn't urge you, if she was likely to know about it and be hurt;
but as it is, it's all fixed that you are to go; and don't let us
have any nonsense about it. We might sit twirling our thumbs, and
repeating hymns all our lives long, if we were to do nothing else
when people were dying."

"I cannot go," repeated Molly. And, acting upon impulse, and almost
to her own surprise, she appealed to her father, who came into the
room at this very time. He contracted his dark eyebrows, and looked
annoyed as both wife and daughter poured their different sides of the
argument into his ears. He sat down in desperation of patience. When
his turn came to pronounce a decision, he said,--

"I suppose I can have some lunch? I went away at six this morning,
and there's nothing in the dining-room. I have to go off again
directly."

Molly started to the door; Mrs. Gibson made haste to ring the bell.

"Where are you going, Molly?" said she, sharply.

"Only to see about papa's lunch."

"There are servants to do it; and I don't like your going into the
kitchen."

"Come, Molly! sit down and be quiet," said her father. "One comes
home wanting peace and quietness--and food too. If I am to be
appealed to, which I beg I may not be another time, I settle that
Molly stops at home this evening. I shall come back late and tired.
See that I have something ready to eat, goosey, and then I'll dress
myself up in my best, and go and fetch you home, my dear. I wish all
these wedding festivities were well over. Ready, is it? Then I'll go
into the dining-room and gorge myself. A doctor ought to be able to
eat like a camel, or like Major Dugald Dalgetty."

It was well for Molly that callers came in just at this time, for
Mrs. Gibson was extremely annoyed. They told her some little local
piece of news, however, which filled up her mind; and Molly found
that, if she only expressed wonder enough at the engagement they had
both heard of from the departed callers, the previous discussion as
to her accompanying her stepmother or not might be entirely passed
over. Not entirely though; for the next morning she had to listen to
a very brilliantly touched-up account of the dance and the gaiety
which she had missed; and also to be told that Mrs. Gibson had
changed her mind about giving her the gown, and thought now that
she should reserve it for Cynthia, if only it was long enough; but
Cynthia was so tall--quite overgrown, in fact. The chances seemed
equally balanced as to whether Molly might not have the gown after
all.




CHAPTER XVIII.

MR. OSBORNE'S SECRET.


[Illustration (untitled)]

Osborne and Roger came to the Hall; Molly found Roger established
there when she returned after this absence at home. She gathered
that Osborne was coming; but very little was said about him in any
way. The Squire scarcely ever left his wife's room; he sat by her,
watching her, and now and then moaning to himself. She was so much
under the influence of opiates that she did not often rouse up; but
when she did, she almost invariably asked for Molly. On these rare
occasions, she would ask after Osborne--where he was, if he had been
told, and if he was coming? In her weakened and confused state of
intellect she seemed to have retained two strong impressions--one,
of the sympathy with which Molly had received her confidence about
Osborne; the other, of the anger which her husband entertained
against him. Before the squire she never mentioned Osborne's name;
nor did she seem at her ease in speaking about him to Roger; while,
when she was alone with Molly, she hardly spoke of any one else.
She must have had some sort of wandering idea that Roger blamed his
brother, while she remembered Molly's eager defence, which she had
thought hopelessly improbable at the time. At any rate, she made
Molly her confidante about her first-born. She sent her to ask Roger
how soon he would come, for she seemed to know perfectly well that he
was coming.

"Tell me all Roger says. He will tell you."

But it was several days before Molly could ask Roger any questions;
and meanwhile Mrs. Hamley's state had materially altered. At length
Molly came upon Roger sitting in the library, his head buried in his
hands. He did not hear her footstep till she was close beside him.
Then he lifted up his face, red, and stained with tears, his hair all
ruffled up and in disorder.

"I've been wanting to see you alone," she began. "Your mother does
so want some news of your brother Osborne. She told me last week to
ask you about him, but I did not like to speak of him before your
father."

"She has hardly ever named him to me."

"I don't know why; for to me she used to talk of him perpetually. I
have seen so little of her this week, and I think she forgets a great
deal now. Still, if you don't mind, I should like to be able to tell
her something if she asks me again."

He put his head again between his hands, and did not answer her for
some time.

"What does she want to know?" said he, at last. "Does she know that
Osborne is coming soon--any day?"

"Yes. But she wants to know where he is."

"I can't tell you. I don't exactly know. I believe he's abroad, but
I'm not sure."

"But you've sent papa's letter to him?"

"I've sent it to a friend of his who will know better than I do where
he's to be found. You must know that he isn't free from creditors,
Molly. You can't have been one of the family, like a child of the
house almost, without knowing that much. For that and for other
reasons I don't exactly know where he is."

"I will tell her so. You are sure he will come?"

"Quite sure. But, Molly, I think my mother may live some time yet;
don't you? Dr. Nicholls said so yesterday when he was here with
your father. He said she had rallied more than he had ever expected.
You're not afraid of any change that makes you so anxious for
Osborne's coming?"

"No. It's only for her that I asked. She did seem so to crave for
news of him. I think she dreamed of him; and then when she wakened
it was a relief to her to talk about him to me. She always seemed to
associate me with him. We used to speak so much of him when we were
together."

"I don't know what we should any of us have done without you. You've
been like a daughter to my mother."

"I do so love her," said Molly, softly.

"Yes; I see. Have you ever noticed that she sometimes calls you
'Fanny?' It was the name of a little sister of ours who died. I think
she often takes you for her. It was partly that, and partly that at
such a time as this one can't stand on formalities, that made me call
you Molly. I hope you don't mind it?"

"No; I like it. But will you tell me something more about your
brother? She really hungers for news of him."

"She'd better ask me herself. Yet, no! I am so involved by promises
of secrecy, Molly, that I couldn't satisfy her if she once began to
question me. I believe he's in Belgium, and that he went there about
a fortnight ago, partly to avoid his creditors. You know my father
has refused to pay his debts?"

"Yes: at least, I knew something like it."

"I don't believe my father could raise the money all at once without
having recourse to steps which he would exceedingly recoil from. Yet
for the time it places Osborne in a very awkward position."

"I think what vexes your father a good deal is some mystery as to how
the money was spent."

"If my mother ever says anything about that part of the affair," said
Roger, hastily, "assure her from me that there's nothing of vice or
wrong-doing about it. I can't say more: I'm tied. But set her mind at
ease on that point."

"I'm not sure if she remembers all her painful anxiety about this,"
said Molly. "She used to speak a great deal to me about him before
you came, when your father seemed so angry. And now, whenever she
sees me she wants to talk on the old subject; but she doesn't
remember so clearly. If she were to see him, I don't believe she
would recollect why she was uneasy about him while he was absent."

"He must be here soon. I expect him every day," said Roger, uneasily.

"Do you think your father will be very angry with him?" asked Molly,
with as much timidity as if the squire's displeasure might be
directed against her.

"I don't know," said Roger. "My mother's illness may alter him; but
he didn't easily forgive us formerly. I remember once--but that is
nothing to the purpose. I can't help fancying that he has put himself
under some strong restraint for my mother's sake, and that he won't
express much. But it doesn't follow that he will forget it. My father
is a man of few affections, but what he has are very strong; he feels
anything that touches him on these points deeply and permanently.
That unlucky valuing of the property! It has given my father the idea
of post-obits--"

"What are they?" asked Molly.

"Raising money to be paid on my father's death, which, of course,
involves calculations as to the duration of his life."

"How shocking!" said she.

"I'm as sure as I am of my own life that Osborne never did anything
of the kind. But my father expressed his suspicions in language
that irritated Osborne; and he doesn't speak out, and won't justify
himself even as much as he might; and, much as he loves me, I've but
little influence over him, or else he would tell my father all. Well,
we must leave it to time," he added, sighing. "My mother would have
brought us all right, if she'd been what she once was."

He turned away, leaving Molly very sad. She knew that every member of
the family she cared for so much was in trouble, out of which she saw
no exit; and her small power of helping them was diminishing day by
day as Mrs. Hamley sank more and more under the influence of opiates
and stupefying illness. Her father had spoken to her only this very
day of the desirableness of her returning home for good. Mrs. Gibson
wanted her--for no particular reason, but for many small fragments of
reasons. Mrs. Hamley had ceased to want her much, only occasionally
appearing to remember her existence. Her position (her father
thought--the idea had not entered her head) in a family of which
the only woman was an invalid confined to bed, was becoming awkward.
But Molly had begged hard to remain two or three days longer--only
that--only till Friday. If Mrs. Hamley should want her (she argued,
with tears in her eyes), and should hear that she had left the house,
she would think her so unkind, so ungrateful!

"My dear child, she's getting past wanting any one! The keenness of
earthly feelings is deadened."

"Papa, that is worst of all. I cannot bear it. I won't believe it.
She may not ask for me again, and may quite forget me; but I'm sure,
to the very last, if the medicines don't stupefy her, she will look
round for the squire and her children. For poor Osborne most of all;
because he's in sorrow."

Mr. Gibson shook his head, but said nothing in reply. In a minute or
two he asked,--

"I don't like to take you away while you even fancy you can be of use
or comfort to one who has been so kind to you; but, if she hasn't
wanted you before Friday, will you be convinced, will you come home
willingly?"

"If I go then, I may see her once again, even if she hasn't asked for
me?" inquired Molly.

"Yes, of course. You must make no noise, no step; but you may go in
and see her. I must tell you, I'm almost certain she won't ask for
you."

"But she may, papa. I will go home on Friday, if she does not. I
think she will."

So Molly hung about the house, trying to do all she could out of the
sick-room, for the comfort of those in it. They only came out for
meals, or for necessary business, and found little time for talking
to her, so her life was solitary enough, waiting for the call that
never came. The evening of the day on which she had had the above
conversation with Roger, Osborne arrived. He came straight into
the drawing-room, where Molly was seated on the rug, reading by
firelight, as she did not like to ring for candles merely for her
own use. Osborne came in, with a kind of hurry, which almost made
him appear as if he would trip himself up, and fall down. Molly rose.
He had not noticed her before; now he came forwards, and took hold
of both her hands, leading her into the full flickering light, and
straining his eyes to look into her face.

"How is she? You will tell me--you must know the truth! I've
travelled day and night since I got your father's letter."

Before she could frame her answer, he had sate down in the nearest
chair, covering his eyes with his hand.

"She's very ill," said Molly. "That you know; but I don't think she
suffers much pain. She has wanted you sadly."

He groaned aloud. "My father forbade me to come."

"I know!" said Molly, anxious to prevent his self-reproach. "Your
brother was away, too. I think no one knew how ill she was--she had
been an invalid for so long."

"You know-- Yes! she told you a great deal--she was very fond of you.
And God knows how I loved her. If I had not been forbidden to come
home, I should have told her all. Does my father know of my coming
now?"

"Yes," said Molly; "I told him papa had sent for you."

Just at that moment the Squire came in. He had not heard of Osborne's
arrival, and was seeking Molly to ask her to write a letter for him.

Osborne did not stand up when his father entered. He was too much
exhausted, too much oppressed by his feelings, and also too much
estranged by his father's angry, suspicious letters. If he had come
forward with any manifestation of feeling at this moment, everything
might have been different. But he waited for his father to see him
before he uttered a word. All that the Squire said when his eye fell
upon him at last was,--

"You here, sir!"

And, breaking off in the directions he was giving to Molly, he
abruptly left the room. All the time his heart was yearning after his
first-born; but mutual pride kept them asunder. Yet he went straight
to the butler, and asked of him when Mr. Osborne had arrived, and how
he had come, and if he had had any refreshment--dinner or what--since
his arrival?

"For I think I forget everything now!" said the poor Squire, putting
his hand up to his head. "For the life of me, I can't remember
whether we've had dinner or not; these long nights, and all this
sorrow and watching, quite bewilder me."

"Perhaps, sir, you will take some dinner with Mr. Osborne. Mrs.
Morgan is sending up his directly. You hardly sate down at
dinner-time, sir, you thought my mistress wanted something."

"Ay! I remember now. No! I won't have any more. Give Mr. Osborne what
wine he chooses. Perhaps _he_ can eat and drink." So the Squire went
away upstairs with bitterness as well as sorrow in his heart.

When lights were brought, Molly was struck with the change in
Osborne. He looked haggard and worn; perhaps with travelling and
anxiety. Not quite such a dainty gentleman either, as Molly had
thought him, when she had last seen him calling on her stepmother,
two months before. But she liked him better now. The tone of his
remarks pleased her more. He was simpler, and less ashamed of showing
his feelings. He asked after Roger in a warm, longing kind of way.
Roger was out: he had ridden to Ashcombe to transact some business
for the Squire. Osborne evidently wished for his return; and hung
about restlessly in the drawing-room after he had dined.

"You're sure I mayn't see her to-night?" he asked Molly, for the
third or fourth time.

"No, indeed. I will go up again if you like it. But Mrs. Jones, the
nurse Dr. Nicholls sent, is a very decided person. I went up while
you were at dinner, and Mrs. Hamley had just taken her drops, and was
on no account to be disturbed by seeing any one, much less by any
excitement."

Osborne kept walking up and down the long drawing-room, half talking
to himself, half to Molly.

"I wish Roger would come. He seems to be the only one to give me a
welcome. Does my father always live upstairs in my mother's rooms,
Miss Gibson?"

"He has done since her last attack. I believe he reproaches himself
for not having been enough alarmed before."

"You heard all the words he said to me; they were not much of a
welcome, were they? And my dear mother, who always--whether I was to
blame or not--I suppose Roger is sure to come home to-night?"

"Quite sure."

"You are staying here, are you not? Do you often see my mother, or
does this omnipotent nurse keep you out too?"

"Mrs. Hamley hasn't asked for me for three days now, and I don't go
into her room unless she asks. I'm leaving on Friday, I believe."

"My mother was very fond of you, I know."

After a while he said, in a voice that had a great deal of sensitive
pain in its tone,--

"I suppose--do you know whether she is quite conscious--quite
herself?"

"Not always conscious," said Molly, tenderly. "She has to take so
many opiates. But she never wanders, only forgets, and sleeps."

"Oh, mother, mother!" said he, stopping suddenly, and hanging over
the fire, his hands on the chimney-piece.

When Roger came home, Molly thought it time to retire. Poor girl!
it was getting to be time for her to leave this scene of distress
in which she could be of no use. She sobbed herself to sleep this
Tuesday night. Two days more, and it would be Friday; and she would
have to wrench up the roots she had shot down into this ground. The
weather was bright the next morning; and morning and sunny weather
cheer up young hearts. Molly sate in the dining-room making tea for
the gentlemen as they came down. She could not help hoping that the
Squire and Osborne might come to a better understanding before she
left; for after all, in the dissension between father and son, lay a
bitterer sting than in the illness sent by God. But though they met
at the breakfast-table, they purposely avoided addressing each other.
Perhaps the natural subject of conversation between the two, at such
a time, would have been Osborne's long journey the night before; but
he had never spoken of the place he had come from, whether north,
south, east, or west, and the Squire did not choose to allude to
anything that might bring out what his son wished to conceal. Again,
there was an unexpressed idea in both their minds that Mrs. Hamley's
present illness was much aggravated, if not entirely brought on, by
the discovery of Osborne's debts; so, many inquiries and answers on
that head were tabooed. In fact, their attempts at easy conversation
were limited to local subjects, and principally addressed to Molly
or Roger. Such intercourse was not productive of pleasure, or even
of friendly feeling, though there was a thin outward surface of
politeness and peace. Long before the day was over, Molly wished that
she had acceded to her father's proposal, and gone home with him.
No one seemed to want her. Mrs. Jones, the nurse, assured her time
after time that Mrs. Hamley had never named her name; and her small
services in the sick-room were not required since there was a regular
nurse. Osborne and Roger seemed all in all to each other; and Molly
now felt how much the short conversations she had had with Roger had
served to give her something to think about, all during the remainder
of her solitary days. Osborne was extremely polite, and even
expressed his gratitude to her for her attentions to his mother in
a very pleasant manner; but he appeared to be unwilling to show
her any of the deeper feelings of his heart, and almost ashamed of
his exhibition of emotion the night before. He spoke to her as any
agreeable young man speaks to any pleasant young lady; but Molly
almost resented this. It was only the Squire who seemed to make her
of any account. He gave her letters to write, small bills to reckon
up; and she could have kissed his hands for thankfulness.

The last afternoon of her stay at the Hall came. Roger had gone out
on the Squire's business. Molly went into the garden, thinking over
the last summer, when Mrs. Hamley's sofa used to be placed under
the old cedar-tree on the lawn, and when the warm air seemed to be
scented with roses and sweetbriar. Now, the trees leafless, there was
no sweet odour in the keen frosty air; and looking up at the house,
there were the white sheets of blinds, shutting out the pale winter
sky from the invalid's room. Then she thought of the day her father
had brought her the news of his second marriage: the thicket was
tangled with dead weeds and rime and hoar-frost; and the beautiful
fine articulations of branches and boughs and delicate twigs were
all intertwined in leafless distinctness against the sky. Could she
ever be so passionately unhappy again? Was it goodness, or was it
numbness, that made her feel as though life was too short to be
troubled much about anything? Death seemed the only reality. She had
neither energy nor heart to walk far or briskly; and turned back
towards the house. The afternoon sun was shining brightly on the
windows; and, stirred up to unusual activity by some unknown cause,
the housemaids had opened the shutters and windows of the generally
unused library. The middle window was also a door; the white-painted
wood went halfway up. Molly turned along the little flag-paved path
that led past the library windows to the gate in the white railings
at the front of the house, and went in at the opened door. She had
had leave given to choose out any books she wished to read, and to
take them home with her; and it was just the sort of half-dawdling
employment suited to her taste this afternoon. She mounted on the
ladder to get to a particular shelf high up in a dark corner of the
room; and finding there some volume that looked interesting, she sat
down on the step to read part of it. There she sat, in her bonnet and
cloak, when Osborne suddenly came in. He did not see her at first;
indeed, he seemed in such a hurry that he probably might not have
noticed her at all, if she had not spoken.

"Am I in your way? I only came here for a minute to look for some
books." She came down the steps as she spoke, still holding the book
in her hand.

"Not at all. It is I who am disturbing you. I must just write a
letter for the post, and then I shall be gone. Is not this open door
too cold for you?"

"Oh, no. It is so fresh and pleasant."

She began to read again, sitting on the lowest step of the ladder;
he to write at the large old-fashioned writing-table close to the
window. There was a minute or two of profound silence, in which the
rapid scratching of Osborne's pen upon the paper was the only sound.
Then came a click of the gate, and Roger stood at the open door. His
face was towards Osborne, sitting in the light; his back to Molly,
crouched up in her corner. He held out a letter, and said in hoarse
breathlessness--

"Here's a letter from your wife, Osborne. I went past the post-office
and thought--"

Osborne stood up, angry dismay upon his face:--

"Roger! what have you done! Don't you see her?"

Roger looked round, and Molly stood up in her corner, red, trembling,
miserable, as though she were a guilty person. Roger entered the
room. All three seemed to be equally dismayed. Molly was the first to
speak; she came forward and said--

"I am so sorry! I didn't wish to hear it, but I couldn't help it. You
will trust me, won't you?" and turning to Roger she said to him with
tears in her eyes--"Please say you know I shall not tell."

"We can't help it," said Osborne, gloomily. "Only Roger, who knew
of what importance it was, ought to have looked round him before
speaking."

"So I should," said Roger. "I'm more vexed with myself than you can
conceive. Not but what I'm as sure of you as of myself," continued
he, turning to Molly.

"Yes; but," said Osborne, "you see how many chances there are
that even the best-meaning persons may let out what it is of such
consequence to me to keep secret."

"I know you think it so," said Roger.

"Well, don't let us begin that old discussion again--at any rate,
before a third person."

Molly had had hard work all this time to keep from crying. Now that
she was alluded to as the third person before whom conversation was
to be restrained, she said--

"I'm going away. Perhaps I ought not to have been here. I'm very
sorry--very. But I'll try and forget what I've heard."

"You can't do that," said Osborne, still ungraciously. "But will you
promise me never to speak about it to any one--not even to me, or to
Roger? Will you try to act and speak as if you had never heard it?
I'm sure, from what Roger has told me about you, that if you give me
this promise I may rely upon it."

"Yes; I will promise," said Molly, putting out her hand as a kind of
pledge. Osborne took it, but rather as if the action was superfluous.
She added, "I think I should have done so, even without a promise.
But it is, perhaps, better to bind oneself. I will go away now. I
wish I'd never come into this room."

She put down her book on the table very softly, and turned to leave
the room, choking down her tears until she was in the solitude of her
own chamber. But Roger was at the door before her, holding it open
for her, and reading--she felt that he was reading--her face. He held
out his hand for hers, and his firm grasp expressed both sympathy and
regret for what had occurred.

She could hardly keep back her sobs till she reached her bedroom. Her
feelings had been overwrought for some time past, without finding the
natural vent in action. The leaving Hamley Hall had seemed so sad
before; and now she was troubled with having to bear away a secret
which she ought never to have known, and the knowledge of which had
brought out a very uncomfortable responsibility. Then there would
arise a very natural wonder as to who Osborne's wife was. Molly had
not stayed so long and so intimately in the Hamley family without
being well aware of the manner in which the future lady of Hamley was
planned for. The Squire, for instance, partly in order to show that
Osborne, his heir, was above the reach of Molly Gibson, the doctor's
daughter, in the early days before he knew Molly well, had often
alluded to the grand, the high, and the wealthy marriage which Hamley
of Hamley, as represented by his clever, brilliant, handsome son
Osborne, might be expected to make. Mrs. Hamley, too, unconsciously
on her part, showed the projects that she was constantly devising for
the reception of the unknown daughter-in-law that was to be.

"The drawing-room must be refurnished when Osborne marries"--or
"Osborne's wife will like to have the west suite of rooms to herself;
it will perhaps be a trial to her to live with the old couple; but we
must arrange it so that she will feel it as little as possible."--"Of
course, when Mrs. Osborne comes we must try and give her a new
carriage; the old one does well enough for us."--These, and similar
speeches had given Molly the impression of the future Mrs. Osborne as
of some beautiful grand young lady, whose very presence would make
the old Hall into a stately, formal mansion, instead of the pleasant,
unceremonious home that it was at present. Osborne, too, who had
spoken with such languid criticism to Mrs. Gibson about various
country belles, and even in his own home was apt to give himself
airs--only at home his airs were poetically fastidious, while with
Mrs. Gibson they had been socially fastidious--what unspeakably
elegant beauty had he chosen for his wife? Who had satisfied him; and
yet satisfying him, had to have her marriage kept in concealment from
his parents? At length Molly tore herself up from her wonderings. It
was of no use: she could not find out; she might not even try. The
blank wall of her promise blocked up the way. Perhaps it was not even
right to wonder, and endeavour to remember slight speeches, casual
mentions of a name, so as to piece them together into something
coherent. Molly dreaded seeing either of the brothers again; but they
all met at dinner-time as if nothing had happened. The Squire was
taciturn, either from melancholy or displeasure. He had never spoken
to Osborne since his return, excepting about the commonest trifles,
when intercourse could not be avoided; and his wife's state oppressed
him like a heavy cloud coming over the light of his day. Osborne put
on an indifferent manner to his father, which Molly felt sure was
assumed; but it was not conciliatory for all that. Roger, quiet,
steady, and natural, talked more than all the others; but he too
was uneasy, and in distress on many accounts. To-day he principally
addressed himself to Molly; entering into rather long narrations of
late discoveries in natural history, which kept up the current of
talk without requiring much reply from any one. Molly had expected
Osborne to look something different from usual--conscious, or
ashamed, or resentful, or even "married"--but he was exactly the
Osborne of the morning--handsome, elegant, languid in manner and in
look; cordial with his brother, polite towards her, secretly uneasy
at the state of things between his father and himself. She would
never have guessed the concealed romance which lay _perdu_ under
that every-day behaviour. She had always wished to come into direct
contact with a love-story: here she had, and she only found it very
uncomfortable; there was a sense of concealment and uncertainty about
it all; and her honest straightforward father, her quiet life at
Hollingford, which, even with all its drawbacks, was above-board,
and where everybody knew what everybody was doing, seemed secure and
pleasant in comparison. Of course she felt great pain at quitting
the Hall, and at the mute farewell she had taken of her sleeping
and unconscious friend. But leaving Mrs. Hamley now was a different
thing to what it had been a fortnight ago. Then she was wanted at any
moment, and felt herself to be of comfort. Now her very existence
seemed forgotten by the poor lady whose body appeared to be living so
long after her soul.

She was sent home in the carriage, loaded with true thanks from every
one of the family. Osborne ransacked the greenhouses for flowers for
her; Roger had chosen her out books of every kind. The Squire himself
kept shaking her hand, without being able to speak his gratitude,
till at last he took her in his arms, and kissed her as he would have
done a daughter.




CHAPTER XIX.

CYNTHIA'S ARRIVAL.


Molly's father was not at home when she returned; and there was no
one to give her a welcome. Mrs. Gibson was out paying calls, the
servants told Molly. She went upstairs to her own room, meaning to
unpack and arrange her borrowed books. Rather to her surprise she saw
the chamber, corresponding to her own, being dusted; water and towels
too were being carried in.

"Is any one coming?" she asked of the housemaid.

"Missus's daughter from France. Miss Kirkpatrick is coming
to-morrow."

Was Cynthia coming at last? Oh, what a pleasure it would be to have a
companion, a girl, a sister of her own age! Molly's depressed spirits
sprang up again with bright elasticity. She longed for Mrs. Gibson's
return, to ask her all about it: it must be very sudden, for Mr.
Gibson had said nothing of it at the Hall the day before. No quiet
reading now; the books were hardly put away with Molly's usual
neatness. She went down into the drawing-room, and could not settle
to anything. At last Mrs. Gibson came home, tired out with her walk
and her heavy velvet cloak. Until that was taken off, and she had
rested herself for a few minutes, she seemed quite unable to attend
to Molly's questions.

"Oh, yes! Cynthia is coming home to-morrow, by the 'Umpire,' which
passes through at ten o'clock. What an oppressive day it is for the
time of the year! I really am almost ready to faint. Cynthia heard of
some opportunity, I believe, and was only too glad to leave school a
fortnight earlier than we planned. She never gave me the chance of
writing to say I did, or did not, like her coming so much before the
time; and I shall have to pay for her just the same as if she had
stopped. And I meant to have asked her to bring me a French bonnet;
and then you could have had one made after mine. But I'm very glad
she's coming, poor dear."

"Is anything the matter with her?" asked Molly.

"Oh, no! Why should there be?"

"You called her 'poor dear,' and it made me afraid lest she might be
ill."

"Oh, no! It's only a way I got into, when Mr. Kirkpatrick died. A
fatherless girl--you know one always does call them 'poor dears.' Oh,
no! Cynthia never is ill. She's as strong as a horse. She never would
have felt to-day as I have done. Could you get me a glass of wine and
a biscuit, my dear? I'm really quite faint."

Mr. Gibson was much more excited about Cynthia's arrival than her
own mother was. He anticipated her coming as a great pleasure to
Molly, on whom, in spite of his recent marriage and his new wife, his
interests principally centred. He even found time to run upstairs and
see the bedrooms of the two girls; for the furniture of which he had
paid a pretty round sum.

"Well, I suppose young ladies like their bedrooms decked out in this
way! It's very pretty certainly, but--"

"I liked my own old room better, papa; but perhaps Cynthia is
accustomed to such decking up."

"Perhaps; at any rate, she'll see we've tried to make it pretty.
Yours is like hers. That's right. It might have hurt her, if hers had
been smarter than yours. Now, good-night in your fine flimsy bed."

Molly was up betimes--almost before it was light--arranging her
pretty Hamley flowers in Cynthia's room. She could hardly eat her
breakfast that morning. She ran upstairs and put on her things,
thinking that Mrs. Gibson was quite sure to go down to the "George
Inn," where the "Umpire" stopped, to meet her daughter after a two
years' absence. But, to her surprise, Mrs. Gibson had arranged
herself at her great worsted-work frame, just as usual; and she, in
her turn, was astonished at Molly's bonnet and cloak.

"Where are you going so early, child? The fog hasn't cleared away
yet."

"I thought you would go and meet Cynthia; and I wanted to go with
you."

"She will be here in half an hour; and dear papa has told the
gardener to take the wheelbarrow down for her luggage. I'm not sure
if he is not gone himself."

"Then are not you going?" asked Molly, with a good deal of
disappointment.

"No, certainly not. She will be here almost directly. And, besides,
I don't like to expose my feelings to every passer-by in High Street.
You forget I have not seen her for two years, and I hate scenes in
the market-place."

She settled herself to her work again; and Molly, after some
consideration, gave up her own going, and employed herself in looking
out of the downstairs window which commanded the approach from the
town.

"Here she is--here she is!" she cried out at last. Her father was
walking by the side of a tall young lady; William the gardener
was wheeling along a great cargo of baggage. Molly flew to the
front-door, and had it wide open to admit the new-comer some time
before she arrived.

"Well! here she is. Molly, this is Cynthia. Cynthia, Molly. You're to
be sisters, you know."

Molly saw the beautiful, tall, swaying figure, against the light of
the open door, but could not see any of the features that were, for
the moment, in shadow. A sudden gush of shyness had come over her
just at the instant, and quenched the embrace she would have given a
moment before. But Cynthia took her in her arms, and kissed her on
both cheeks.

"Here's mamma," she said, looking beyond Molly on to the stairs where
Mrs. Gibson stood, wrapped up in a shawl, and shivering in the cold.
She ran past Molly and Mr. Gibson, who rather averted their eyes from
this first greeting between mother and child.

Mrs. Gibson said--

"Why, how you are grown, darling! You look quite a woman."

"And so I am," said Cynthia. "I was before I went away; I've hardly
grown since,--except, it is always to be hoped, in wisdom."

"Yes! That we will hope," said Mrs. Gibson, in rather a meaning
way. Indeed there were evidently hidden allusions in their seeming
commonplace speeches. When they all came into the full light and
repose of the drawing-room, Molly was absorbed in the contemplation
of Cynthia's beauty. Perhaps her features were not regular; but the
changes in her expressive countenance gave one no time to think of
that. Her smile was perfect; her pouting charming; the play of the
face was in the mouth. Her eyes were beautifully shaped, but their
expression hardly seemed to vary. In colouring she was not unlike
her mother; only she had not so much of the red-haired tints in her
complexion; and her long-shaped, serious grey eyes were fringed with
dark lashes, instead of her mother's insipid flaxen ones. Molly fell
in love with her, so to speak, on the instant. She sate there warming
her feet and hands, as much at her ease as if she had been there all
her life; not particularly attending to her mother--who, all the
time, was studying either her or her dress--measuring Molly and Mr.
Gibson with grave observant looks, as if guessing how she should like
them.

"There's hot breakfast ready for you in the dining-room, when you are
ready for it," said Mr. Gibson. "I'm sure you must want it after your
night journey." He looked round at his wife, at Cynthia's mother, but
she did not seem inclined to leave the warm room again.

"Molly will take you to your room, darling," said she; "it is near
hers, and she has got her things to take off. I'll come down and sit
in the dining-room while you are having your breakfast, but I really
am afraid of the cold now."

Cynthia rose and followed Molly upstairs.

"I'm so sorry there isn't a fire for you," said Molly, "but--I
suppose it wasn't ordered; and, of course, I don't give any orders.
Here is some hot water, though."

"Stop a minute," said Cynthia, getting hold of both Molly's hands,
and looking steadily into her face, but in such a manner that she did
not dislike the inspection.

"I think I shall like you. I am so glad! I was afraid I should not.
We're all in a very awkward position together, aren't we? I like your
father's looks, though."


[Illustration: FIRST IMPRESSIONS.]


Molly could not help smiling at the way this was said. Cynthia
replied to her smile.

"Ah, you may laugh. But I don't know that I am easy to get on with;
mamma and I didn't suit when we were last together. But perhaps we
are each of us wiser now. Now, please leave me for a quarter of an
hour. I don't want anything more."

Molly went into her own room, waiting to show Cynthia down to the
dining-room. Not that, in the moderate-sized house, there was any
difficulty in finding the way. A very little trouble in conjecturing
would enable a stranger to discover any room. But Cynthia had
so captivated Molly, that she wanted to devote herself to the
new-comer's service. Ever since she had heard of the probability
of her having a sister--(she called her a sister, but whether it was
a Scotch sister, or a sister _ł la mode de BrÄtagne_, would have
puzzled most people)--Molly had allowed her fancy to dwell much on
the idea of Cynthia's coming; and in the short time since they had
met, Cynthia's unconscious power of fascination had been exercised
upon her. Some people have this power. Of course, its effects are
only manifested in the susceptible. A school-girl may be found in
every school who attracts and influences all the others, not by her
virtues, nor her beauty, nor her sweetness, nor her cleverness, but
by something that can neither be described nor reasoned upon. It is
the something alluded to in the old lines:--

   Love me not for comely grace,
   For my pleasing eye and face;
   No, nor for my constant heart,--
   For these may change, and turn to ill,
   And thus true love may sever.
   But love me on, and know not why,
   So hast thou the same reason still
   To dote upon me ever.

A woman will have this charm, not only over men but over her own
sex; it cannot be defined, or rather it is so delicate a mixture
of many gifts and qualities that it is impossible to decide on the
proportions of each. Perhaps it is incompatible with very high
principle; as its essence seems to consist in the most exquisite
power of adaptation to varying people and still more various moods;
"being all things to all men." At any rate, Molly might soon have
been aware that Cynthia was not remarkable for unflinching morality;
but the glamour thrown over her would have prevented Molly from any
attempt at penetrating into and judging her companion's character,
even had such processes been the least in accordance with her own
disposition.

Cynthia was very beautiful, and was so well aware of this fact that
she had forgotten to care about it; no one with such loveliness ever
appeared so little conscious of it. Molly would watch her perpetually
as she moved about the room, with the free stately step of some wild
animal of the forest--moving almost, as it were, to the continual
sound of music. Her dress, too, though now to our ideas it would
be considered ugly and disfiguring, was suited to her complexion
and figure, and the fashion of it subdued within due bounds by her
exquisite taste. It was inexpensive enough, and the changes in it
were but few. Mrs. Gibson professed herself shocked to find that
Cynthia had but four gowns, when she might have stocked herself so
well, and brought over so many useful French patterns, if she had but
patiently waited for her mother's answer to the letter which she had
sent, announcing her return by the opportunity madame had found for
her. Molly was hurt for Cynthia at all these speeches; she thought
they implied that the pleasure which her mother felt in seeing her a
fortnight sooner after her two years' absence was inferior to that
which she would have received from a bundle of silver-paper patterns.
But Cynthia took no apparent notice of the frequent recurrence of
these small complaints. Indeed, she received much of what her mother
said with a kind of complete indifference, that made Mrs. Gibson hold
her rather in awe; and she was much more communicative to Molly than
to her own child. With regard to dress, however, Cynthia soon showed
that she was her mother's own daughter in the manner in which she
could use her deft and nimble fingers. She was a capital workwoman;
and, unlike Molly, who excelled in plain sewing, but had no notion of
dressmaking or millinery, she could repeat the fashions she had only
seen in passing along the streets of Boulogne, with one or two pretty
rapid movements of her hands, as she turned and twisted the ribbons
and gauze her mother furnished her with. So she refurbished Mrs.
Gibson's wardrobe; doing it all in a sort of contemptuous manner, the
source of which Molly could not quite make out.

Day after day the course of these small frivolities was broken in
upon by the news Mr. Gibson brought of Mrs. Hamley's nearer approach
to death. Molly--very often sitting by Cynthia, and surrounded by
ribbon, and wire, and net--heard the bulletins like the toll of a
funeral bell at a marriage feast. Her father sympathized with her. It
was the loss of a dear friend to him too; but he was so accustomed to
death, that it seemed to him but as it was, the natural end of all
things human. To Molly, the death of some one she had known so well
and loved so much, was a sad and gloomy phenomenon. She loathed the
small vanities with which she was surrounded, and would wander out
into the frosty garden, and pace the walk, which was both sheltered
and concealed by evergreens.

At length--and yet it was not so long, not a fortnight since Molly
had left the Hall--the end came. Mrs. Hamley had sunk out of life as
gradually as she had sunk out of consciousness and her place in this
world. The quiet waves closed over her, and her place knew her no
more.

"They all sent their love to you, Molly," said her father. "Roger
said he knew how you would feel it."

Mr. Gibson had come in very late, and was having a solitary dinner
in the dining-room. Molly was sitting near him to keep him company.
Cynthia and her mother were upstairs. The latter was trying on a
head-dress which Cynthia had made for her.

Molly remained downstairs after her father had gone out afresh on
his final round among his town patients. The fire was growing very
low, and the lights were waning. Cynthia came softly in, and taking
Molly's listless hand, that hung down by her side, sat at her feet
on the rug, chafing her chilly fingers without speaking. The tender
action thawed the tears that had been gathering heavily at Molly's
heart, and they came dropping down her cheeks.

"You loved her dearly, did you not, Molly?"

"Yes," sobbed Molly; and then there was a silence.

"Had you known her long?"

"No, not a year. But I had seen a great deal of her. I was almost
like a daughter to her; she said so. Yet I never bid her good-by, or
anything. Her mind became weak and confused."

"She had only sons, I think?"

"No; only Mr. Osborne and Mr. Roger Hamley. She had a daughter
once--'Fanny.' Sometimes, in her illness, she used to call me
'Fanny.'"

The two girls were silent for some time, both gazing into the fire.
Cynthia spoke first:--

"I wish I could love people as you do, Molly!"

"Don't you?" said the other, in surprise.

"No. A good number of people love me, I believe, or at least they
think they do; but I never seem to care much for any one. I do
believe I love you, little Molly, whom I have only known for ten
days, better than any one."

"Not than your mother?" said Molly, in grave astonishment.

"Yes, than my mother!" replied Cynthia, half-smiling. "It's very
shocking, I daresay; but it is so. Now, don't go and condemn me. I
don't think love for one's mother quite comes by nature; and remember
how much I have been separated from mine! I loved my father, if you
will," she continued, with the force of truth in her tone, and then
she stopped; "but he died when I was quite a little thing, and no one
believes that I remember him. I heard mamma say to a caller, not a
fortnight after his funeral, 'Oh, no, Cynthia is too young; she has
quite forgotten him'--and I bit my lips, to keep from crying out,
'Papa! papa! have I?' But it's of no use. Well, then mamma had to go
out as a governess; she couldn't help it, poor thing! but she didn't
much care for parting with me. I was a trouble, I daresay. So I was
sent to school at four years old; first one school, and then another;
and in the holidays, mamma went to stay at grand houses, and I was
generally left with the schoolmistresses. Once I went to the Towers;
and mamma lectured me continually, and yet I was very naughty, I
believe. And so I never went again; and I was very glad of it, for it
was a horrid place."

"That it was!" said Molly, who remembered her own day of tribulation
there.

"And once I went to London, to stay with my uncle Kirkpatrick. He is
a lawyer, and getting on now; but then he was poor enough, and had
six or seven children. It was winter-time, and we were all shut up in
a small house in Doughty Street. But, after all, that wasn't so bad."

"But then you lived with your mother when she began school at
Ashcombe. Mr. Preston told me that, when I stayed that day at the
Manor-house."

"What did he tell you?" asked Cynthia, almost fiercely.

"Nothing but that. Oh, yes! He praised your beauty, and wanted me to
tell you what he had said."

"I should have hated you if you had," said Cynthia.

"Of course I never thought of doing such a thing," replied Molly. "I
didn't like him; and Lady Harriet spoke of him the next day, as if he
wasn't a person to be liked."

Cynthia was quite silent. At length she said,--

"I wish I was good!"

"So do I," said Molly, simply. She was thinking again of Mrs.
Hamley,--

   Only the actions of the just
   Smell sweet and blossom in the dust,

and "goodness" just then seemed to her to be the only enduring thing
in the world.

"Nonsense, Molly! You are good. At least, if you're not good, what
am I? There's a rule-of-three sum for you to do! But it's no use
talking; I am not good, and I never shall be now. Perhaps I might be
a heroine still, but I shall never be a good woman, I know."

"Do you think it easier to be a heroine?"

"Yes, as far as one knows of heroines from history. I'm capable of a
great jerk, an effort, and then a relaxation--but steady, every-day
goodness is beyond me. I must be a moral kangaroo!"

Molly could not follow Cynthia's ideas; she could not distract
herself from the thoughts of the sorrowing group at the Hall.

"How I should like to see them all! and yet one can do nothing at
such a time! Papa says the funeral is to be on Tuesday, and that,
after that, Roger Hamley is to go back to Cambridge. It will seem
as if nothing had happened! I wonder how the squire and Mr. Osborne
Hamley will get on together."

"He's the eldest son, is he not? Why shouldn't he and his father get
on well together?"

"Oh! I don't know. That is to say, I do know, but I think I ought not
to tell."

"Don't be so pedantically truthful, Molly. Besides, your manner shows
when you speak truth and when you speak falsehood, without troubling
yourself to use words. I knew exactly what your 'I don't know' meant.
I never consider myself bound to be truthful, so I beg we may be on
equal terms."

Cynthia might well say she did not consider herself bound to be
truthful; she literally said what came uppermost, without caring very
much whether it was accurate or not. But there was no ill-nature,
and, in a general way, no attempt at procuring any advantage for
herself in all her deviations; and there was often such a latent
sense of fun in them that Molly could not help being amused with them
in fact, though she condemned them in theory. Cynthia's playfulness
of manner glossed such failings over with a kind of charm; and yet,
at times, she was so soft and sympathetic that Molly could not resist
her, even when she affirmed the most startling things. The little
account she made of her own beauty pleased Mr. Gibson extremely; and
her pretty deference to him won his heart. She was restless too, till
she had attacked Molly's dress, after she had remodelled her
mother's.

"Now for you, sweet one," said she as she began upon one of Molly's
gowns. "I've been working as connoisseur until now; now I begin as
amateur."

She brought down her pretty artificial flowers, plucked out of her
own best bonnet to put into Molly's, saying they would suit her
complexion, and that a knot of ribbons would do well enough for her.
All the time she worked, she sang; she had a sweet voice in singing,
as well as in speaking, and used to run up and down her gay French
_chansons_ without any difficulty; so flexible in the art was she.
Yet she did not seem to care for music. She rarely touched the piano,
on which Molly practised with daily conscientiousness. Cynthia was
always willing to answer questions about her previous life, though,
after the first, she rarely alluded to it of herself; but she was a
most sympathetic listener to all Molly's innocent confidences of joys
and sorrows: sympathizing even to the extent of wondering how she
could endure Mr. Gibson's second marriage, and why she did not take
some active steps of rebellion.

In spite of all this agreeable and pungent variety of companionship
at home, Molly yearned after the Hamleys. If there had been a woman
in that family she would probably have received many little notes,
and heard numerous details which were now lost to her, or summed
up in condensed accounts of her father's visits at the Hall, which,
since his dear patient was dead, were only occasional.

"Yes! The Squire is a good deal changed; but he's better than he was.
There's an unspoken estrangement between him and Osborne; one can
see it in the silence and constraint of their manners; but outwardly
they are friendly--civil at any rate. The squire will always respect
Osborne as his heir, and the future representative of the family.
Osborne doesn't look well; he says he wants change. I think he's
weary of the domestic dullness, or domestic dissension. But he feels
his mother's death acutely. It's a wonder that he and his father are
not drawn together by their common loss. Roger's away at Cambridge
too--examination for the mathematical tripos. Altogether the aspect
of both people and place is changed; it is but natural!"

Such is perhaps the summing-up of the news of the Hamleys, as
contained in many bulletins. They always ended in some kind message
to Molly.

Mrs. Gibson generally said, as a comment upon her husband's account
of Osborne's melancholy,--

"My dear! why don't you ask him to dinner here? A little quiet
dinner, you know. Cook is quite up to it; and we would all of us wear
blacks and lilacs; he couldn't consider that as gaiety."

Mr. Gibson took no more notice of these suggestions than by shaking
his head. He had grown accustomed to his wife by this time, and
regarded silence on his own part as a great preservative against long
inconsequential arguments. But every time that Mrs. Gibson was struck
by Cynthia's beauty, she thought it more and more advisable that Mr.
Osborne Hamley should be cheered up by a quiet little dinner-party.
As yet no one but the ladies of Hollingford and Mr. Ashton, the
vicar--that hopeless and impracticable old bachelor--had seen
Cynthia; and what was the good of having a lovely daughter, if there
were none but old women to admire her?

Cynthia herself appeared extremely indifferent upon the subject,
and took very little notice of her mother's constant talk about the
gaieties that were possible, and the gaieties that were impossible,
in Hollingford. She exerted herself just as much to charm the two
Miss Brownings as she would have done to delight Osborne Hamley,
or any other young heir. That is to say, she used no exertion, but
simply followed her own nature, which was to attract every one of
those she was thrown amongst. The exertion seemed rather to be
to refrain from doing so, and to protest, as she often did, by
slight words and expressive looks against her mother's words and
humours--alike against her folly and her caresses. Molly was almost
sorry for Mrs. Gibson, who seemed so unable to gain influence over
her child. One day Cynthia read Molly's thought.

"I'm not good, and I told you so. Somehow, I cannot forgive her
for her neglect of me as a child, when I would have clung to her.
Besides, I hardly ever heard from her when I was at school. And I
know she put a stop to my coming over to her wedding. I saw the
letter she wrote to Madame Lefevre. A child should be brought up with
its parents, if it is to think them infallible when it grows up."

"But though it may know that there must be faults," replied Molly,
"it ought to cover them over and try to forget their existence."

"It ought. But don't you see I have grown up outside the pale of
duty and 'oughts.' Love me as I am, sweet one, for I shall never be
better."




CHAPTER XX.

MRS. GIBSON'S VISITORS.


One day, to Molly's infinite surprise, Mr. Preston was announced
as a caller. Mrs. Gibson and she were sitting together in the
drawing-room; Cynthia was out--gone into the town a-shopping--when
the door was opened, the name given, and in walked the young man. His
entrance seemed to cause more confusion than Molly could well account
for. He came in with the same air of easy assurance with which he
had received her and her father at Ashcombe Manor-house. He looked
remarkably handsome in his riding-dress, and with the open-air
exercise he had just had. But Mrs. Gibson's smooth brows contracted a
little at the sight of him, and her reception of him was much cooler
than that which she usually gave to visitors. Yet there was a degree
of agitation in it, which surprised Molly a little. Mrs. Gibson was
at her everlasting worsted-work frame when Mr. Preston entered the
room; but somehow in rising to receive him, she threw down her basket
of crewels, and, declining Molly's offer to help her, she would pick
up all the reels herself, before she asked her visitor to sit down.
He stood there, hat in hand, affecting an interest in the recovery of
the worsted which Molly was sure he did not feel; for all the time
his eyes were glancing round the room, and taking note of the details
in the arrangement.

At length they were seated, and conversation began.

"It is the first time I have been in Hollingford since your marriage,
Mrs. Gibson, or I should certainly have called to pay my respects
sooner."

"I know you are very busy at Ashcombe. I did not expect you to call.
Is Lord Cumnor at the Towers? I have not heard from her ladyship for
more than a week!"

"No! he seemed still detained at Bath. But I had a letter from him
giving me certain messages for Mr. Sheepshanks. Mr. Gibson is not at
home, I'm afraid?"

"No. He is a great deal out--almost constantly, I may say. I had no
idea that I should see so little of him. A doctor's wife leads a very
solitary life, Mr. Preston!"

"You can hardly call it solitary, I should think, when you have such
a companion as Miss Gibson always at hand," said he, bowing to Molly.

"Oh, but I call it solitude for a wife when her husband is away. Poor
Mr. Kirkpatrick was never happy unless I always went with him;--all
his walks, all his visits, he liked me to be with him. But, somehow,
Mr. Gibson feels as if I should be rather in his way."

"I don't think you could ride pillion behind him on Black Bess,
mamma," said Molly. "And unless you could do that, you could hardly
go with him in his rounds up and down all the rough lanes."

"Oh! but he might keep a brougham! I've often said so. And then I
could use it for visiting in the evenings. Really it was one reason
why I didn't go to the Hollingford Charity Ball. I couldn't bring
myself to use the dirty fly from the 'George.' We really must stir
papa up against next winter, Molly; it will never do for you and--"

She pulled herself up suddenly, and looked furtively at Mr. Preston
to see if he had taken any notice of her abruptness. Of course he
had, but he was not going to show it. He turned to Molly, and said,--

"Have you ever been to a public ball yet, Miss Gibson?"

"No!" said Molly.

"It will be a great pleasure to you when the time comes."

"I'm not sure. I shall like it if I have plenty of partners; but I'm
afraid I shan't know many people."

"And you suppose that young men haven't their own ways and means of
being introduced to pretty girls?"

It was exactly one of the speeches Molly had disliked him for before;
and delivered, too, in that kind of underbred manner which showed
that it was meant to convey a personal compliment. Molly took great
credit to herself for the unconcerned manner with which she went on
with her tatting exactly as if she had never heard it.

"I only hope I may be one of your partners at the first ball you go
to. Pray, remember my early application for that honour, when you are
overwhelmed with requests for dances."

"I don't choose to engage myself beforehand," said Molly, perceiving,
from under her dropped eyelids, that he was leaning forward and
looking at her as though he was determined to have an answer.

"Young ladies are always very cautious in fact, however modest they
may be in profession," he replied, addressing himself in a nonchalant
manner to Mrs. Gibson. "In spite of Miss Gibson's apprehension of not
having many partners, she declines the certainty of having one. I
suppose Miss Kirkpatrick will have returned from France before then?"

He said these last words exactly in the same tone as he had used
before; but Molly's instinct told her that he was making an effort to
do so. She looked up. He was playing with his hat, almost as if he
did not care to have any answer to his question. Yet he was listening
acutely, and with a half smile on his face.

Mrs. Gibson reddened a little, and hesitated,--

"Yes; certainly. My daughter will be with us next winter, I believe;
and I daresay she will go out with us."

"Why can't she say at once that Cynthia is here now?" asked Molly of
herself, yet glad that Mr. Preston's curiosity was baffled.

He still smiled; but this time he looked up at Mrs. Gibson, as he
asked,--"You have good news from her, I hope?"

"Yes; very. By the way, how are our old friends the Robinsons? How
often I think of their kindness to me at Ashcombe! Dear good people,
I wish I could see them again."

"I will certainly tell them of your kind inquiries. They are very
well, I believe."

Just at this moment, Molly heard the familiar sound of the click
and opening of the front door. She knew it must be Cynthia; and,
conscious of some mysterious reason which made Mrs. Gibson wish to
conceal her daughter's whereabouts from Mr. Preston, and maliciously
desirous to baffle him, she rose to leave the room, and meet Cynthia
on the stairs; but one of the lost crewels of worsted had entangled
itself in her gown and feet, and before she had freed herself of the
encumbrance, Cynthia had opened the drawing-room door, and stood
in it, looking at her mother, at Molly, at Mr. Preston, but not
advancing one step. Her colour, which had been brilliant the first
moment of her entrance, faded away as she gazed; but her eyes--her
beautiful eyes--usually so soft and grave, seemed to fill with fire,
and her brows to contract, as she took the resolution to come forward
and take her place among the three, who were all looking at her with
different emotions. She moved calmly and slowly forwards; Mr. Preston
went a step or two to meet her, his hand held out, and the whole
expression of his face that of eager delight.

But she took no notice of the outstretched hand, nor of the chair
that he offered her. She sate down on a little sofa in one of the
windows, and called Molly to her.

"Look at my purchases," said she. "This green ribbon was
fourteen-pence a yard, this silk three shillings," and so she went
on, forcing herself to speak about these trifles as if they were
all the world to her, and she had no attention to throw away on her
mother and her mother's visitor.

Mr. Preston took his cue from her. He, too, talked of the news of
the day, the local gossip--but Molly, who glanced up at him from
time to time, was almost alarmed by the bad expression of suppressed
anger, almost amounting to vindictiveness, which entirely marred his
handsome looks. She did not wish to look again; and tried rather to
back up Cynthia's efforts at maintaining a separate conversation. Yet
she could not help overhearing Mrs. Gibson's strain after increased
civility, as if to make up for Cynthia's rudeness, and, if possible,
to deprecate his anger. She talked perpetually, as though her object
were to detain him; whereas, previous to Cynthia's return, she had
allowed frequent pauses in the conversation, as though to give him
the opportunity to take his leave.

In the course of the conversation between them the Hamleys came up.
Mrs. Gibson was never unwilling to dwell upon Molly's intimacy with
this county family; and when the latter caught the sound of her own
name, her stepmother was saying,--

"Poor Mrs. Hamley could hardly do without Molly; she quite looked
upon her as a daughter, especially towards the last, when, I am
afraid, she had a good deal of anxiety. Mr. Osborne Hamley--I daresay
you have heard--he did not do so well at college, and they had
expected so much--parents will, you know; but what did it signify?
for he had not to earn his living! I call it a very foolish kind of
ambition when a young man has not to go into a profession."

"Well, at any rate, the Squire must be satisfied now. I saw this
morning's _Times_, with the Cambridge examination lists in it. Isn't
the second son called after his father, Roger?"

"Yes," said Molly, starting up, and coming nearer.

"He's senior wrangler, that's all," said Mr. Preston, almost as
though he were vexed with himself for having anything to say that
could give her pleasure. Molly went back to her seat by Cynthia.

"Poor Mrs. Hamley," said she, very softly, as if to herself. Cynthia
took her hand, in sympathy with Molly's sad and tender look, rather
than because she understood all that was passing in her mind, nor did
she quite understand it herself. A death that had come out of time;
a wonder whether the dead knew what passed upon the earth they had
left--the brilliant Osborne's failure, Roger's success; the vanity
of human wishes,--all these thoughts, and what they suggested, were
inextricably mingled up in her mind. She came to herself in a few
minutes. Mr. Preston was saying all the unpleasant things he could
think of about the Hamleys in a tone of false sympathy.

"The poor old Squire--not the wisest of men--has woefully mismanaged
his estate. And Osborne Hamley is too fine a gentleman to understand
the means by which to improve the value of the land--even if he had
the capital. A man who had practical knowledge of agriculture, and
some thousands of ready money, might bring the rental up to eight
thousand or so. Of course, Osborne will try and marry some one with
money; the family is old and well-established, and he mustn't object
to commercial descent, though I daresay the Squire will for him; but
then the young fellow himself is not the man for the work. No! the
family's going down fast; and it's a pity when these old Saxon houses
vanish off the land; but it is 'kismet' with the Hamleys. Even the
senior wrangler--if it is that Roger Hamley--he will have spent all
his brains in one effort. You never hear of a senior wrangler being
worth anything afterwards. He'll be a Fellow of his college, of
course--that will be a livelihood for him at any rate."

"I believe in senior wranglers," said Cynthia, her clear high voice
ringing through the room. "And from all I've ever heard of Mr. Roger
Hamley, I believe he will keep up the distinction he has earned. And
I don't believe that the house of Hamley is so near extinction in
wealth and fame, and good name."

"They are fortunate in having Miss Kirkpatrick's good word," said Mr.
Preston, rising to take his leave.

"Dear Molly," said Cynthia, in a whisper, "I know nothing about your
friends the Hamleys, except that they are your friends, and what you
have told me about them. But I won't have that man speaking of them
so--and your eyes filling with tears all the time. I'd sooner swear
to their having all the talents and good fortune under the sun."

The only person of whom Cynthia appeared to be wholesomely afraid
was Mr. Gibson. When he was present she was more careful in speaking,
and showed more deference to her mother. Her evident respect for him,
and desire to win his good opinion, made her curb herself before him;
and in this manner she earned his favour as a lively, sensible girl,
with just so much knowledge of the world as made her a very desirable
companion to Molly. Indeed, she made something of the same kind of
impression on all men. They were first struck with her personal
appearance; and then with her pretty deprecating manner, which
appealed to them much as if she had said, "You are wise, and I am
foolish--have mercy on my folly." It was a way she had; it meant
nothing really; and she was hardly conscious of it herself; but it
was very captivating all the same. Even old Williams, the gardener,
felt it; he said to his confidante, Molly--

"Eh, miss, but that be a rare young lady! She do have such pretty
coaxing ways. I be to teach her to bud roses come the season--and
I'll warrant ye she'll learn sharp enough, for all she says she bees
so stupid."

If Molly had not had the sweetest disposition in the world she might
have become jealous of all the allegiance laid at Cynthia's feet;
but she never thought of comparing the amount of admiration and
love which they each received. Yet once she did feel a little as
if Cynthia were poaching on her manor. The invitation to the quiet
dinner had been sent to Osborne Hamley, and declined by him. But he
thought it right to call soon afterwards. It was the first time Molly
had seen any of the family since she left the Hall, just before Mrs.
Hamley's death; and there was so much that she wanted to ask. She
tried to wait patiently till Mrs. Gibson had exhausted the first gush
of her infinite nothings; and then Molly came in with her modest
questions. How was the Squire? Had he returned to his old habits? Had
his health suffered?--putting each inquiry with as light and delicate
a touch as if she had been dressing a wound. She hesitated a little,
a very little, before speaking of Roger; for just one moment the
thought flitted across her mind, that Osborne might feel the contrast
between his own and his brother's college career too painfully to
like to have it referred to; but then she remembered the generous
brotherly love that had always existed between the two, and had just
entered upon the subject, when Cynthia in obedience to her mother's
summons, came into the room, and took up her work. No one could have
been quieter--she hardly uttered a word; but Osborne seemed to fall
under her power at once. He no longer gave his undivided attention
to Molly. He cut short his answers to her questions; and by-and-by,
without Molly's rightly understanding how it was, he had turned
towards Cynthia, and was addressing himself to her. Molly saw the
look of content on Mrs. Gibson's face; perhaps it was her own
mortification at not having heard all she wished to know about Roger,
which gave her a keener insight than usual, but certain it is that
all at once she perceived that Mrs. Gibson would not dislike a
marriage between Osborne and Cynthia, and considered the present
occasion as an auspicious beginning. Remembering the secret which she
had been let into so unwillingly, Molly watched his behaviour, almost
as if she had been retained in the interest of the absent wife; but,
after all, thinking as much of the possibility of his attracting
Cynthia as of the unknown and mysterious Mrs. Osborne Hamley. His
manner was expressive of great interest and of strong prepossession
in favour of the beautiful girl to whom he was talking. He was in
deep mourning, which showed off his slight figure and delicate
refined face. But there was nothing of flirting, as far as Molly
understood the meaning of the word, in either looks or words.
Cynthia, too, was extremely quiet; she was always much quieter with
men than with women; it was part of the charm of her soft allurement
that she was so passive. They were talking of France. Mrs. Gibson
herself had passed two or three years of her girlhood there; and
Cynthia's late return from Boulogne made it a very natural subject
of conversation. But Molly was thrown out of it; and with her heart
still unsatisfied as to the details of Roger's success, she had to
stand up at last, and receive Osborne's good-by, scarcely longer or
more intimate than his farewell to Cynthia. As soon as he was gone,
Mrs. Gibson began in his praise.

"Well, really, I begin to have some faith in long descent. What a
gentleman he is! How agreeable and polite! So different from that
forward Mr. Preston," she continued, looking a little anxiously at
Cynthia. Cynthia, quite aware that her reply was being watched for,
said, coolly,--

"Mr. Preston doesn't improve on acquaintance. There was a time,
mamma, when I think both you and I thought him very agreeable."

"I don't remember. You've a clearer memory than I have. But we were
talking of this delightful Mr. Osborne Hamley. Why, Molly, you were
always talking of his brother--it was Roger this, and Roger that--I
can't think how it was you so seldom mentioned this young man."

"I didn't know I had mentioned Mr. Roger Hamley so often," said
Molly, blushing a little. "But I saw much more of him--he was more at
home."

"Well, well! It's all right, my dear. I daresay he suits you best.
But really, when I saw Osborne Hamley close to my Cynthia, I couldn't
help thinking--but perhaps I'd better not tell you what I was
thinking of. Only they are each of them so much above the average in
appearance; and, of course, that suggests things."

"I perfectly understand what you were thinking of, mamma," said
Cynthia, with the greatest composure; "and so does Molly, I have no
doubt."

"Well! there's no harm in it, I'm sure. Did you hear him say that,
though he did not like to leave his father alone just at present, yet
that when his brother Roger came back from Cambridge, he should feel
more at liberty! It was quite as much as to say, 'If you will ask me
to dinner then, I shall be delighted to come.' And chickens will be
so much cheaper, and cook has such a nice way of boning them, and
doing them up with forcemeat. Everything seems to be falling out
so fortunately. And Molly, my dear, you know I won't forget you.
By-and-by, when Roger Hamley has taken his turn at stopping at home
with his father, we will ask him to one of our little quiet dinners."

Molly was very slow at taking this in; but in about a minute the
sense of it had reached her brain, and she went all over very red and
hot; especially as she saw that Cynthia was watching the light come
into her mind with great amusement.

"I'm afraid Molly isn't properly grateful, mamma. If I were you, I
wouldn't exert myself to give a dinner-party on her account. Bestow
all your kindness upon me."

Molly was often puzzled by Cynthia's speeches to her mother; and this
was one of these occasions. But she was more anxious to say something
for herself; she was so much annoyed at the implication in Mrs.
Gibson's last words.

"Mr. Roger Hamley has been very good to me; he was a great deal at
home when I was there, and Mr. Osborne Hamley was very little there:
that was the reason I spoke so much more of one than the other. If I
had--if he had,"--losing her coherence in the difficulty of finding
words,--"I don't think I should,--oh, Cynthia, instead of laughing at
me, I think you might help me to explain myself!"

Instead, Cynthia gave a diversion to the conversation.

"Mamma's paragon gives me an idea of weakness. I can't quite make out
whether it's in body or mind. Which is it, Molly?"

"He is not strong, I know; but he's very accomplished and clever.
Every one says that,--even papa, who doesn't generally praise young
men. That made the puzzle the greater when he did so badly at
college."

"Then it's his character that is weak. I'm sure there's weakness
somewhere; but he's very agreeable. It must have been very pleasant,
staying at the Hall."

"Yes; but it's all over now."

"Oh, nonsense!" said Mrs. Gibson, wakening up from counting the
stitches in her pattern. "We shall have the young men coming to
dinner pretty often, you'll see. Your father likes them, and I shall
always make a point of welcoming his friends. They can't go on
mourning for a mother for ever. I expect we shall see a great deal of
them; and that the two families will become very intimate. After all,
these good Hollingford people are terribly behindhand, and I should
say, rather commonplace."




CHAPTER XXI.

THE HALF-SISTERS.


[Illustration (untitled)]

It appeared as if Mrs. Gibson's predictions were likely to be
verified; for Osborne Hamley found his way to her drawing-room pretty
frequently. To be sure, sometimes prophets can help on the fulfilment
of their own prophecies; and Mrs. Gibson was not passive.

Molly was altogether puzzled by his manners and ways. He spoke of
occasional absences from the Hall, without exactly saying where he
had been. But that was not her idea of the conduct of a married man;
who, she imagined, ought to have a house and servants, and pay rent
and taxes, and live with his wife. Who this mysterious wife might be
faded into insignificance before the wonder of where she was. London,
Cambridge, Dover, nay, even France, were mentioned by him as places
to which he had been on these different little journeys. These facts
came out quite casually, almost as if he was unaware of what he was
betraying. Sometimes he dropped out such sentences as these:--"Ah,
that would be the day I was crossing! It was stormy indeed! Instead
of our being only two hours, we were nearly five." Or, "I met Lord
Hollingford at Dover last week, and he said," &c. "The cold now is
nothing to what it was in London on Thursday--the thermometer was
down at 15 ." Perhaps, in the rapid flow of conversation, these
small revelations were noticed by no one but Molly; whose interest
and curiosity were always hovering over the secret she had become
possessed of, in spite of all her self-reproach for allowing her
thoughts to dwell on what was still to be kept as a mystery.

It was also evident to her that Osborne was not too happy at home.
He had lost the slight touch of cynicism which he had affected when
he was expected to do wonders at college; and that was one good
result of his failure. If he did not give himself the trouble of
appreciating other people, and their performances, at any rate his
conversation was not so amply sprinkled with critical pepper. He was
more absent, not so agreeable, Mrs. Gibson thought, but did not say.
He looked ill in health; but that might be the consequence of the
real depression of spirits which Molly occasionally saw peeping out
through all his pleasant surface-talk. Now and then, when he was
talking directly to her, he referred to "the happy days that are
gone," or, "to the time when my mother was alive;" and then his voice
sank, and a gloom came over his countenance, and Molly longed to
express her own deep sympathy. He did not often mention his father;
and Molly thought she could read in his manner, when he did, that
something of the painful restraint she had noticed when she was last
at the Hall still existed between them. Nearly every particular she
knew of the family interior she had heard from Mrs. Hamley, and she
was uncertain how far her father was acquainted with them; so she
did not like to question him too closely; nor was he a man to be so
questioned as to the domestic affairs of his patients. Sometimes she
wondered if it was a dream--that short half-hour in the library at
Hamley Hall--when she had learnt a fact which seemed so all-important
to Osborne, yet which made so little difference in his way of
life--either in speech or action. During the twelve or fourteen hours
that she had remained at the Hall afterwards, no further allusion
had been made to his marriage, either by himself or by Roger. It was,
indeed, very like a dream. Probably Molly would have been rendered
much more uncomfortable in the possession of her secret if Osborne
had struck her as particularly attentive in his devotion to Cynthia.
She evidently amused and attracted him, but not in any lively or
passionate kind of way. He admired her beauty, and seemed to feel
her charm; but he would leave her side, and come to sit near Molly,
if anything reminded him of his mother, about which he could talk
to her, and to her alone. Yet he came so often to the Gibsons, that
Mrs. Gibson might be excused for the fancy she had taken into her
head, that it was for Cynthia's sake. He liked the lounge, the
friendliness, the company of two intelligent girls of beauty and
manners above the average; one of whom stood in a peculiar relation
to him, as having been especially beloved by the mother whose memory
he cherished so fondly. Knowing himself to be out of the category
of bachelors, he was, perhaps, too indifferent as to other people's
ignorance, and its possible consequences.

Somehow, Molly did not like to be the first to introduce Roger's name
into the conversation, so she lost many an opportunity of hearing
intelligence about him. Osborne was often so languid or so absent
that he only followed the lead of talk; and as an awkward fellow,
who had paid her no particular attention, and as a second son, Roger
was not pre-eminent in Mrs. Gibson's thoughts; Cynthia had never
seen him, and the freak did not take her often to speak about him.
He had not come home since he had obtained his high place in the
mathematical lists: that Molly knew; and she knew, too, that he was
working hard for something--she supposed a fellowship--and that was
all. Osborne's tone in speaking of him was always the same: every
word, every inflection of the voice breathed out affection and
respect--nay, even admiration! And this from the _nil admirari_
brother, who seldom carried his exertions so far.

"Ah, Roger!" he said one day. Molly caught the name in an instant,
though she had not heard what had gone before. "He is a fellow in a
thousand--in a thousand, indeed! I don't believe there is his match
anywhere for goodness and real solid power combined."

"Molly," said Cynthia, after Mr. Osborne Hamley had gone, "what sort
of a man is this Roger Hamley? One can't tell how much to believe of
his brother's praises; for it is the one subject on which Osborne
Hamley becomes enthusiastic. I've noticed it once or twice before."

While Molly hesitated on which point of the large round to begin her
description, Mrs. Gibson struck in,--

"It just shows what a sweet disposition Osborne Hamley is of--that
he should praise his brother as he does. I daresay he is a senior
wrangler, and much good may it do him! I don't deny that; but as for
conversation, he's as heavy as heavy can be. A great awkward fellow
to boot, who looks as if he did not know two and two made four, for
all he is such a mathematical genius. You would hardly believe he
was Osborne Hamley's brother to see him! I should not think he has a
profile at all."

"What do you think of him, Molly?" said the persevering Cynthia.

"I like him," said Molly. "He has been very kind to me. I know he
isn't handsome like Osborne."

It was rather difficult to say all this quietly, but Molly managed to
do it, quite aware that Cynthia would not rest till she had extracted
some kind of an opinion out of her.

"I suppose he will come home at Easter," said Cynthia, "and then I
shall see him for myself."

"It's a great pity that their being in mourning will prevent their
going to the Easter charity ball," said Mrs. Gibson, plaintively.
"I shan't like to take you two girls, if you are not to have any
partners. It will put me in such an awkward position. I wish we could
join on to the Towers party. That would secure you partners, for they
always bring a number of dancing men, who might dance with you after
they had done their duty by the ladies of the house. But really
everything is so changed since dear Lady Cumnor has been an invalid
that, perhaps, they won't go at all."

This Easter ball was a great subject of conversation with Mrs.
Gibson. She sometimes spoke of it as her first appearance in society
as a bride, though she had been visiting once or twice a week all
winter long. Then she shifted her ground, and said she felt so much
interest in it, because she would then have the responsibility of
introducing both her own and Mr. Gibson's daughter to public notice,
though the fact was that pretty nearly every one who was going to
this ball had seen the two young ladies--though not their ball
dresses--before. But, aping the manners of the aristocracy as far
as she knew them, she intended to "bring out" Molly and Cynthia on
this occasion, which she regarded in something of the light of a
presentation at Court. "They are not out yet," was her favourite
excuse when either of them was invited to any house to which she did
not wish them to go, or they were invited without her. She even made
a difficulty about their "not being out" when Miss Browning--that
old friend of the Gibson family--came in one morning to ask the two
girls to come to a friendly tea and a round game afterwards; this
mild piece of gaiety being designed as an attention to three of Mrs.
Goodenough's grandchildren--two young ladies and their schoolboy
brother--who were staying on a visit to their grand-mamma.

"You are very kind, Miss Browning, but, you see, I hardly like to let
them go--they are not out, you know, till after the Easter ball."

"Till when we are invisible," said Cynthia, always ready with her
mockery to exaggerate any pretension of her mother's. "We are so high
in rank that our sovereign must give us her sanction before we can
play a round game at your house."

Cynthia enjoyed the idea of her own full-grown size and stately gait,
as contrasted with that of a meek, half-fledged girl in the nursery;
but Miss Browning was half puzzled and half affronted.

"I don't understand it at all. In my days girls went wherever it
pleased people to ask them, without this farce of bursting out in all
their new fine clothes at some public place. I don't mean but what
the gentry took their daughters to York, or Matlock, or Bath, to
give them a taste of gay society when they were growing up; and the
quality went up to London, and their young ladies were presented to
Queen Charlotte, and went to a birthday ball, perhaps. But for us
little Hollingford people--why, we knew every child amongst us from
the day of its birth; and many a girl of twelve or fourteen have I
seen go out to a card-party, and sit quiet at her work, and know how
to behave as well as any lady there. There was no talk of 'coming
out' in those days for any one under the daughter of a Squire."

"After Easter, Molly and I shall know how to behave at a card-party,
but not before," said Cynthia, demurely.

"You're always fond of your quips and your cranks, my dear," said
Miss Browning, "and I wouldn't quite answer for your behaviour: you
sometimes let your spirits carry you away. But I'm quite sure Molly
will be a little lady as she always is, and always was, and I have
known her from a babe."

Mrs. Gibson took up arms on behalf of her own daughter, or, rather,
she took up arms against Molly's praises.

"I don't think you would have called Molly a lady the other day,
Miss Browning, if you had found her where I did: sitting up in a
cherry-tree, six feet from the ground at least, I do assure you."

"Oh! but that wasn't pretty," said Miss Browning, shaking her head at
Molly. "I thought you'd left off those tom-boy ways."

"She wants the refinement which good society gives in several ways,"
said Mrs. Gibson, returning to the attack on poor Molly. "She's very
apt to come upstairs two steps at a time."

"Only two, Molly!" said Cynthia. "Why, to-day I found I could manage
four of these broad shallow steps."

"My dear child, what are you saying?"

"Only confessing that I, like Molly, want the refinements which good
society gives; therefore, please do let us go to Miss Brownings'
this evening. I will pledge myself for Molly that she shan't sit in
a cherry-tree; and Molly shall see that I don't go upstairs in an
unladylike way. I will go upstairs as meekly as if I were a come-out
young lady, and had been to the Easter ball."

So it was agreed that they should go. If Mr. Osborne Hamley had been
named as one of the probable visitors, there would have been none of
this difficulty about the affair.

But though he was not there, his brother Roger was. Molly saw him in
a minute when she entered the little drawing-room; but Cynthia did
not.

"And see, my dears," said Miss Phoebe Browning, turning them round
to the side where Roger stood waiting for his turn of speaking
to Molly, "we've got a gentleman for you after all! Wasn't it
fortunate?--just as sister said that you might find it dull--you,
Cynthia, she meant, because you know you come from France--then, just
as if he had been sent from heaven, Mr. Roger came in to call; and I
won't say we laid violent hands on him, because he was too good for
that; but really we should have been near it, if he had not stayed of
his own accord."

The moment Roger had done his cordial greeting to Molly, he asked her
to introduce him to Cynthia.


[Illustration: ROGER IS INTRODUCED AND ENSLAVED.]


"I want to know her--your new sister," he added, with the kind smile
Molly remembered so well since the very first day she had seen it
directed towards her, as she sate crying under the weeping ash.
Cynthia was standing a little behind Molly when Roger asked for this
introduction. She was generally dressed with careless grace. Molly,
who was delicate neatness itself, used sometimes to wonder how
Cynthia's tumbled gowns, tossed away so untidily, had the art of
looking so well, and falling in such graceful folds. For instance,
the pale lilac muslin gown she wore this evening had been worn many
times before, and had looked unfit to wear again till Cynthia put
it on. Then the limpness became softness, and the very creases took
the lines of beauty. Molly, in a daintily clean pink muslin, did not
look half so elegantly dressed as Cynthia. The grave eyes that the
latter raised when she had to be presented to Roger had a sort of
child-like innocence and wonder about them, which did not quite
belong to Cynthia's character. She put on her armour of magic that
evening--involuntarily as she always did; but, on the other side, she
could not help trying her power on strangers. Molly had always felt
that she should have a right to a good long talk with Roger when she
next saw him; and that he would tell her, or she should gather from
him all the details she so longed to hear about the Squire--about
the Hall--about Osborne--about himself. He was just as cordial and
friendly as ever with her. If Cynthia had not been there, all would
have gone on as she had anticipated; but of all the victims to
Cynthia's charms he fell most prone and abject. Molly saw it all,
as she was sitting next to Miss Phoebe at the tea-table, acting
right-hand, and passing cake, cream, sugar, with such busy assiduity
that every one besides herself thought that her mind, as well as her
hands, was fully occupied. She tried to talk to the two shy girls,
as in virtue of her two years' seniority she thought herself bound
to do; and the consequence was, she went upstairs with the twain
clinging to her arms, and willing to swear an eternal friendship.
Nothing would satisfy them but that she must sit between them at
vingt-un; and they were so desirous of her advice in the important
point of fixing the price of the counters that she could not ever
have joined in the animated conversation going on between Roger and
Cynthia. Or, rather, it would be more correct to say that Roger was
talking in a most animated manner to Cynthia, whose sweet eyes were
fixed upon his face with a look of great interest in all he was
saying, while it was only now and then she made her low replies.
Molly caught a few words occasionally in intervals of business.

"At my uncle's, we always give a silver threepence for three dozen.
You know what a silver threepence is, don't you, dear Miss Gibson?"

"The three classes are published in the Senate House at nine o'clock
on the Friday morning, and you can't imagine--"

"I think it will be thought rather shabby to play at anything less
than sixpence. That gentleman" (this in a whisper) "is at Cambridge,
and you know they always play very high there, and sometimes ruin
themselves, don't they, dear Miss Gibson?"

"Oh, on this occasion the Master of Arts who precedes the candidates
for honours when they go into the Senate House is called the Father
of the College to which he belongs. I think I mentioned that before,
didn't I?"

So Cynthia was hearing all about Cambridge, and the very examination
about which Molly had felt such keen interest, without having ever
been able to have her questions answered by a competent person;
and Roger, to whom she had always looked as the final and most
satisfactory answerer, was telling the whole of what she wanted to
know, and she could not listen. It took all her patience to make up
little packets of counters, and settle, as the arbiter of the game,
whether it would be better for the round or the oblong counters to be
reckoned as six. And when all was done, and every one sate in their
places round the table, Roger and Cynthia had to be called twice
before they came. They stood up, it is true, at the first sound of
their names; but they did not move--Roger went on talking, Cynthia
listening till the second call; when they hurried to the table and
tried to appear, all on a sudden, quite interested in the great
questions of the game--namely, the price of three dozen counters, and
whether, all things considered, it would be better to call the round
counters or the oblong half-a-dozen each. Miss Browning, drumming the
pack of cards on the table, and quite ready to begin dealing, decided
the matter by saying, "Rounds are sixes, and three dozen counters
cost sixpence. Pay up, if you please, and let us begin at once."
Cynthia sate between Roger and William Orford, the young schoolboy,
who bitterly resented on this occasion his sisters' habit of calling
him "Willie," as he thought it was this boyish sobriquet which
prevented Cynthia from attending as much to him as to Mr. Roger
Hamley; he also was charmed by the charmer, who found leisure to
give him one or two of her sweet smiles. On his return home to his
grand-mamma's, he gave out one or two very decided and rather original
opinions, quite opposed--as was natural--to his sisters'. One was--

"That, after all, a senior wrangler was no great shakes. Any man
might be one if he liked, but there were a lot of fellows that he
knew who would be very sorry to go in for anything so slow."

Molly thought the game never would end. She had no particular turn
for gambling in her; and whatever her card might be, she regularly
put on two counters, indifferent as to whether she won or lost.
Cynthia, on the contrary, staked high, and was at one time very rich,
but ended by being in debt to Molly something like six shillings. She
had forgotten her purse, she said, and was obliged to borrow from the
more provident Molly, who was aware that the round game of which Miss
Browning had spoken to her was likely to require money. If it was
not a very merry affair for all the individuals concerned, it was
a very noisy one on the whole. Molly thought it was going to last
till midnight; but punctually, as the clock struck nine, the little
maid-servant staggered in under the weight of a tray loaded with
sandwiches, cakes, and jelly. This brought on a general move; and
Roger, who appeared to have been on the watch for something of the
kind, came and took a chair by Molly.

"I am so glad to see you again--it seems such a long time since
Christmas," said he, dropping his voice, and not alluding more
exactly to the day when she had left the Hall.

"It is a long time," she replied; "we are close to Easter now. I
have so wanted to tell you how glad I was to hear about your honours
at Cambridge. I once thought of sending you a message through
your brother, but then I thought it might be making too much fuss,
because I know nothing of mathematics, or of the value of a senior
wranglership; and you were sure to have so many congratulations from
people who did know."

"I missed yours though, Molly," said he, kindly. "But I felt sure you
were glad for me."

"Glad and proud too," said she. "I should so like to hear something
more about it. I heard you telling Cynthia--"

"Yes. What a charming person she is! I should think you must be
happier than we expected long ago."

"But tell me something about the senior wranglership, please," said
Molly.

"It's a long story, and I ought to be helping the Miss Brownings to
hand sandwiches--besides, you wouldn't find it very interesting, it's
so full of technical details."

"Cynthia looked very much interested," said Molly.

"Well! then I refer you to her, for I must go now. I can't for shame
go on sitting here, and letting those good ladies have all the
trouble. But I shall come and call on Mrs. Gibson soon. Are you
walking home to-night?"

"Yes, I think so," replied Molly, eagerly foreseeing what was to
come.

"Then I shall walk home with you. I left my horse at the 'George,'
and that's half-way. I suppose old Betty will allow me to accompany
you and your sister? You used to describe her as something of a
dragon."

"Betty has left us," said Molly, sadly. "She's gone to live at a
place at Ashcombe."

He made a face of dismay, and then went off to his duties. The short
conversation had been very pleasant, and his manner had had just the
brotherly kindness of old times; but it was not quite the manner he
had to Cynthia; and Molly half thought she would have preferred the
latter. He was now hovering about Cynthia, who had declined the offer
of refreshments from Willie Orford. Roger was tempting her, and with
playful entreaties urging her to take some thing from him. Every word
they said could be heard by the whole room; yet every word was said,
on Roger's part at least, as if he could not have spoken it in that
peculiar manner to any one else. At length, and rather more because
she was weary of being entreated, than because it was his wish,
Cynthia took a macaroon, and Roger seemed as happy as though she
had crowned him with flowers. The whole affair was as trifling and
commonplace as could be in itself; hardly worth noticing; and yet
Molly did notice it, and felt uneasy; she could not tell why. As it
turned out, it was a rainy night, and Mrs. Gibson sent a fly for the
two girls instead of old Betty's substitute. Both Cynthia and Molly
thought of the possibility of their taking the two Orford girls back
to their grandmother's, and so saving them a wet walk; but Cynthia
got the start in speaking about it; and the thanks and the implied
praise for thoughtfulness were hers.

When they got home Mr. and Mrs. Gibson were sitting in the
drawing-room, quite ready to be amused by any details of the evening.

Cynthia began,--

"Oh! it wasn't very entertaining. One didn't expect that," and she
yawned wearily.

"Who were there?" asked Mr. Gibson. "Quite a young party--wasn't it?"

"They'd only asked Lizzie and Fanny Orford, and their brother; but
Mr. Roger Hamley had ridden over and called on Miss Brownings, and
they kept him to tea. No one else."

"Roger Hamley there!" said Mr. Gibson. "He's come home then. I must
make time to ride over and see him."

"You'd much better ask him here," said Mrs. Gibson. "Suppose you
invite him and his brother to dine here on Friday, my dear. It would
be a very pretty attention, I think."

"My dear! these young Cambridge men have a very good taste in wine,
and don't spare it. My cellar won't stand many of their attacks."

"I didn't think you were so inhospitable, Mr. Gibson."

"I'm not inhospitable, I'm sure. If you'll put 'bitter beer' in the
corner of your notes of invitation, just as the smart people put
'quadrilles' as a sign of the entertainment offered, we'll have
Osborne and Roger to dinner any day you like. And what did you think
of my favourite, Cynthia? You hadn't seen him before, I think?"

"Oh! he's nothing like so handsome as his brother; nor so polished;
nor so easy to talk to. He entertained me for more than an hour with
a long account of some examination or other; but there's something
one likes about him."

"Well--and Molly," said Mrs. Gibson, who piqued herself on being an
impartial stepmother, and who always tried hard to make Molly talk as
much as Cynthia,--"what sort of an evening have you had?"

"Very pleasant, thank you." Her heart a little belied her as she said
this. She had not cared for the round game; and she would have cared
for Roger's conversation. She had had what she was indifferent to,
and not had what she would have liked.

"We've had our unexpected visitor, too," said Mr. Gibson. "Just after
dinner, who should come in but Mr. Preston. I fancy he's having
more of the management of the Hollingford property than formerly.
Sheepshanks is getting an old man. And if so, I suspect we shall
see a good deal of Preston. He's 'no blate,' as they used to say in
Scotland, and made himself quite at home to-night. If I'd asked him
to stay, or, indeed, if I'd done anything but yawn, he'd have been
here now. But I defy any man to stay when I've a fit of yawning."

"Do you like Mr. Preston, papa?" asked Molly.

"About as much as I do half the men I meet. He talks well, and has
seen a good deal. I know very little of him, though, except that he's
my lord's steward, which is a guarantee for a good deal."

"Lady Harriet spoke pretty strongly against him that day I was with
her at the Manor-house."

"Lady Harriet's always full of fancies: she likes persons to-day, and
dislikes them to-morrow," said Mrs. Gibson, who was touched on her
sore point whenever Molly quoted Lady Harriet, or said anything to
imply ever so transitory an intimacy with her.

"You must know a good deal about Mr. Preston, my dear. I suppose you
saw a good deal of him at Ashcombe?"

Mrs. Gibson coloured, and looked at Cynthia before she replied.
Cynthia's face was set into a determination not to speak, however
much she might be referred to.

"Yes; we saw a good deal of him--at one time, I mean. He's
changeable, I think. But he always sent us game, and sometimes fruit.
There were some stories against him, but I never believed them."

"What kind of stories?" said Mr. Gibson, quickly.

"Oh, vague stories, you know: scandal, I daresay. No one ever
believed them. He could be so agreeable if he chose; and my lord, who
is so very particular, would never have kept him as agent if they
were true; not that I ever knew what they were, for I consider all
scandal as abominable gossip."

"I'm very glad I yawned in his face," said Mr. Gibson. "I hope he'll
take the hint."

"If it was one of your giant-gapes, papa, I should call it more than
a hint," said Molly. "And if you want a yawning chorus the next time
he comes, I'll join in; won't you, Cynthia?"

"I don't know," replied the latter, shortly, as she lighted her
bed-candle. The two girls had usually some nightly conversation in
one or other of their bed-rooms; but to-night Cynthia said something
or other about being terribly tired, and hastily shut her door.

The very next day, Roger came to pay his promised call. Molly was out
in the garden with Williams, planning the arrangement of some new
flower-beds, and deep in her employment of placing pegs upon the lawn
to mark out the different situations, when, standing up to mark the
effect, her eye was caught by the figure of a gentleman, sitting with
his back to the light, leaning forwards and talking, or listening,
eagerly. Molly knew the shape of the head perfectly, and hastily
began to put off her brown-holland gardening apron, emptying the
pockets as she spoke to Williams.

"You can finish it now, I think," said she. "You know about the
bright-coloured flowers being against the privet-hedge, and where the
new rose-bed is to be?"

"I can't justly say as I do," said he. "Mebbe, you'll just go o'er it
all once again, Miss Molly. I'm not so young as I oncst was, and my
head is not so clear now-a-days, and I'd be loath to make mistakes
when you're so set upon your plans."

Molly gave up her impulse in a moment. She saw that the old gardener
was really perplexed, yet that he was as anxious as he could be to do
his best. So she went over the ground again, pegging and explaining
till the wrinkled brow was smooth again, and he kept saying, "I see,
miss. All right, Miss Molly, I'se gotten it in my head as clear as
patchwork now."

So she could leave him, and go in. But just as she was close to the
garden door, Roger came out. It really was for once a case of virtue
its own reward, for it was far pleasanter to her to have him in a
tÉte-ł-tÉte, however short, than in the restraint of Mrs. Gibson's
and Cynthia's presence.

"I only just found out where you were, Molly. Mrs. Gibson said you
had gone out, but she didn't know where; and it was the greatest
chance that I turned round and saw you."

"I saw you some time ago, but I couldn't leave Williams. I think he
was unusually slow to-day; and he seemed as if he couldn't understand
my plans for the new flower-beds."

"Is that the paper you've got in your hand? Let me look at it, will
you? Ah, I see! you've borrowed some of your ideas from our garden at
home, haven't you? This bed of scarlet geraniums, with the border of
young oaks, pegged down! That was a fancy of my dear mother's."

They were both silent for a minute or two. Then Molly said,--

"How is the Squire? I've never seen him since."

"No, he told me how much he wanted to see you, but he couldn't make
up his mind to come and call. I suppose it would never do now for you
to come and stay at the Hall, would it? It would give my father so
much pleasure: he looks upon you as a daughter, and I'm sure both
Osborne and I shall always consider you are like a sister to us,
after all my mother's love for you, and your tender care of her at
last. But I suppose it wouldn't do."

"No! certainly not," said Molly, hastily.

"I fancy if you could come it would put us a little to rights. You
know, as I think I once told you, Osborne has behaved differently to
what I should have done, though not wrongly,--only what I call an
error of judgment. But my father, I'm sure, has taken up some notion
of--never mind; only the end of it is that he holds Osborne still in
tacit disgrace, and is miserable himself all the time. Osborne, too,
is sore and unhappy, and estranged from my father. It is just what
my mother would have put right very soon, and perhaps you could
have done it--unconsciously, I mean--for this wretched mystery that
Osborne preserves about his affairs is at the root of it all. But
there's no use talking about it; I don't know why I began." Then,
with a wrench, changing the subject, while Molly still thought of
what he had been telling her, he broke out,--"I can't tell you how
much I like Miss Kirkpatrick, Molly. It must be a great pleasure to
you having such a companion!"

"Yes," said Molly, half smiling. "I'm very fond of her; and I think I
like her better every day I know her. But how quickly you have found
out her virtues!"

"I didn't say 'virtues,' did I?" asked he, reddening, but putting
the question in all good faith. "Yet I don't think one could be
deceived in that face. And Mrs. Gibson appears to be a very friendly
person,--she has asked Osborne and me to dine here on Friday."

"Bitter beer" came into Molly's mind; but what she said was, "And are
you coming?"

"Certainly, I am, unless my father wants me; and I've given Mrs.
Gibson a conditional promise for Osborne, too. So I shall see you all
very soon again. But I must go now. I have to keep an appointment
seven miles from here in half-an-hour's time. Good luck to your
flower-garden, Molly."




CHAPTER XXII.

THE OLD SQUIRE'S TROUBLES.


Affairs were going on worse at the Hall than Roger had liked to tell.
Moreover, very much of the discomfort there arose from "mere manner,"
as people express it, which is always indescribable and indefinable.
Quiet and passive as Mrs. Hamley had always been in appearance,
she was the ruling spirit of the house as long as she lived. The
directions to the servants, down to the most minute particulars,
came from her sitting-room, or from the sofa on which she lay. Her
children always knew where to find her; and to find her, was to find
love and sympathy. Her husband, who was often restless and angry from
one cause or another, always came to her to be smoothed down and
put right. He was conscious of her pleasant influence over him, and
became at peace with himself when in her presence; just as a child
is at ease when with some one who is both firm and gentle. But the
keystone of the family arch was gone, and the stones of which it
was composed began to fall apart. It is always sad when a sorrow of
this kind seems to injure the character of the mourning survivors.
Yet, perhaps, this injury may be only temporary or superficial; the
judgments so constantly passed upon the way in which people bear the
loss of those whom they have deeply loved, appear to be even more
cruel, and wrongly meted out, than human judgments generally are. To
careless observers, for instance, it would seem as though the Squire
was rendered more capricious and exacting, more passionate and
authoritative, by his wife's death. The truth was, that it occurred
at a time when many things came to harass him, and some to bitterly
disappoint him; and _she_ was no longer there to whom he used to
carry his sore heart for the gentle balm of her sweet words. So the
sore heart ached and smarted intensely; and often, when he saw how
his violent conduct affected others, he could have cried out for
their pity, instead of their anger and resentment: "Have mercy upon
me, for I am very miserable." How often have such dumb thoughts gone
up from the hearts of those who have taken hold of their sorrow
by the wrong end, as prayers against sin! And when the Squire saw
that his servants were learning to dread him, and his first-born to
avoid him, he did not blame them. He knew he was becoming a domestic
tyrant; it seemed as if all circumstances conspired against him, and
as if he was too weak to struggle with them; else, why did everything
in doors and out of doors go so wrong just now, when all he could
have done, had things been prosperous, was to have submitted, in very
imperfect patience, to the loss of his wife? But just when he needed
ready money to pacify Osborne's creditors, the harvest had turned out
remarkably plentiful, and the price of corn had sunk down to a level
it had not touched for years. The Squire had insured his life at the
time of his marriage for a pretty large sum. It was to be a provision
for his wife, if she survived him, and for their younger children.
Roger was the only representative of these interests now; but the
Squire was unwilling to lose the insurance by ceasing to pay the
annual sum. He would not, if he could, have sold any part of the
estate which he inherited from his father; and, besides, it was
strictly entailed. He had sometimes thought how wise a step it
would have been could he have sold a portion of it, and with the
purchase-money have drained and reclaimed the remainder; and at
length, learning from some neighbour that Government would make
certain advances for drainage, &c., at a very low rate of interest,
on condition that the work was done, and the money repaid, within a
given time, his wife had urged him to take advantage of the proffered
loan. But now that she was no longer there to encourage him, and take
an interest in the progress of the work, he grew indifferent to it
himself, and cared no more to go out on his stout roan cob, and sit
square on his seat, watching the labourers on the marshy land all
overgrown with rushes; speaking to them from time to time in their
own strong nervous country dialect: but the interest to Government
had to be paid all the same, whether the men worked well or ill.
Then the roof of the Hall let in the melted snow-water this winter;
and, on examination, it turned out that a new roof was absolutely
required. The men who had come about the advances made to Osborne by
the London money-lender, had spoken disparagingly of the timber on
the estate--"Very fine trees--sound, perhaps, too, fifty years ago,
but gone to rot now; had wanted lopping and clearing. Was there no
wood-ranger or forester? They were nothing like the value young Mr.
Hamley had represented them to be." The remarks had come round to
the squire's ears. He loved the trees he had played under as a boy
as if they were living creatures; that was on the romantic side of
his nature. Merely looking at them as representing so many pounds
sterling, he had esteemed them highly, and had had, until now,
no opinion of another by which to correct his own judgment. So
these words of the valuers cut him sharp, although he affected to
disbelieve them, and tried to persuade himself that he did so. But,
after all, these cares and disappointments did not touch the root of
his deep resentment against Osborne. There is nothing like wounded
affection for giving poignancy to anger. And the Squire believed that
Osborne and his advisers had been making calculations, based upon his
own death. He hated the idea so much--it made him so miserable--that
he would not face it, and define it, and meet it with full inquiry
and investigation. He chose rather to cherish the morbid fancy that
he was useless in this world--born under an unlucky star--that all
things went badly under his management. But he did not become humble
in consequence. He put his misfortunes down to the score of Fate--not
to his own; and he imagined that Osborne saw his failures, and that
his first-born grudged him his natural term of life. All these
fancies would have been set to rights could he have talked them over
with his wife; or even had he been accustomed to mingle much in
the society of those whom he esteemed his equals; but, as has been
stated, he was inferior in education to those who should have been
his mates; and perhaps the jealousy and _mauvaise honte_ that this
inferiority had called out long ago, extended itself in some measure
to the feelings he entertained towards his sons--less to Roger
than to Osborne, though the former was turning out by far the most
distinguished man. But Roger was practical; interested in all
out-of-doors things, and he enjoyed the details, homely enough, which
his father sometimes gave him of the every-day occurrences which
the latter had noticed in the woods and the fields. Osborne, on the
contrary, was what is commonly called "fine;" delicate almost to
effeminacy in dress and in manner; careful in small observances. All
this his father had been rather proud of in the days when he looked
forward to a brilliant career at Cambridge for his son; he had at
that time regarded Osborne's fastidiousness and elegance as another
stepping-stone to the high and prosperous marriage which was to
restore the ancient fortunes of the Hamley family. But now that
Osborne had barely obtained his degree; that all the boastings of his
father had proved vain; that the fastidiousness had led to unexpected
expenses (to attribute the most innocent cause to Osborne's debts),
the poor young man's ways and manners became a subject of irritation
to his father. Osborne was still occupied with his books and his
writings when he was at home; and this mode of passing the greater
part of the day gave him but few subjects in common with his father
when they did meet at meal times, or in the evenings. Perhaps if
Osborne had been able to have more out-of-door amusements it would
have been better; but he was short-sighted, and cared little for the
carefully observant pursuits of his brother; he knew but few young
men of his own standing in the county; his hunting even, of which he
was passionately fond, had been curtailed this season, as his father
had disposed of one of the two hunters he had been hitherto allowed.
The whole stable establishment had been reduced; perhaps because it
was the economy which told most on the enjoyment of both the Squire
and Osborne, and which, therefore, the former took a savage pleasure
in enforcing. The old carriage--a heavy family coach bought in the
days of comparative prosperity--was no longer needed after madam's
death, and fell to pieces in the cobwebbed seclusion of the
coach-house. The best of the two carriage-horses was taken for a gig,
which the Squire now set up; saying many a time to all who might
care to listen to him that it was the first time for generations
that the Hamleys of Hamley had not been able to keep their own coach.
The other carriage-horse was turned out to grass; being too old for
regular work. Conqueror used to come whinnying up to the park palings
whenever he saw the Squire, who had always a piece of bread, or some
sugar, or an apple for the old favourite; and would make many a
complaining speech to the dumb animal, telling him of the change of
times since both were in their prime. It had never been the Squire's
custom to encourage his boys to invite their friends to the Hall.
Perhaps this, too, was owing to his _mauvaise honte_, and also to an
exaggerated consciousness of the deficiencies of his establishment as
compared with what he imagined these lads were accustomed to at home.
He explained this once or twice to Osborne and Roger when they were
at Rugby.

"You see, all you public schoolboys have a kind of freemasonry of
your own, and outsiders are looked on by you much as I look on
rabbits and all that isn't game. Ay, you may laugh, but it is so; and
your friends will throw their eyes askance at me, and never think on
my pedigree, which would beat theirs all to shivers, I'll be bound.
No; I'll have no one here at the Hall who will look down on a Hamley
of Hamley, even if he only knows how to make a cross instead of write
his name."

Then, of course, they must not visit at houses to whose sons the
Squire could not or would not return a like hospitality. On all these
points Mrs. Hamley had used her utmost influence without avail;
his prejudices were immoveable. As regarded his position as head
of the oldest family in three counties, his pride was invincible;
as regarded himself personally--ill at ease in the society of
his equals, deficient in manners, and in education--his morbid
sensitiveness was too sore and too self-conscious to be called
humility.

Take one instance from among many similar scenes of the state of
feeling between him and his eldest son, which, if it could not be
called active discord, showed at least passive estrangement.

It took place on an evening in the March succeeding Mrs. Hamley's
death. Roger was at Cambridge. Osborne had also been from home, and
he had not volunteered any information as to his absence. The Squire
believed that Osborne had been either at Cambridge with his brother,
or in London; he would have liked to hear where his son had been,
what he had been doing, and whom he had seen, purely as pieces of
news, and as some diversion from the domestic worries and cares which
were pressing him hard; but he was too proud to ask any questions,
and Osborne had not given him any details of his journey. This
silence had aggravated the Squire's internal dissatisfaction, and
he came home to dinner weary and sore-hearted a day or two after
Osborne's return. It was just six o'clock, and he went hastily into
his own little business-room on the ground-floor, and, after washing
his hands, came into the drawing-room feeling as if he were very
late, but the room was empty. He glanced at the clock over the
mantel-piece, as he tried to warm his hands at the fire. The fire had
been neglected, and had gone out during the day; it was now piled up
with half-dried wood, which sputtered and smoked instead of doing its
duty in blazing and warming the room, through which the keen wind was
cutting its way in all directions. The clock had stopped, no one had
remembered to wind it up, but by the squire's watch it was already
past dinner-time. The old butler put his head into the room, but,
seeing the squire alone, he was about to draw it back, and wait
for Mr. Osborne, before announcing dinner. He had hoped to do this
unperceived, but the squire caught him in the act.

"Why isn't dinner ready?" he called out sharply. "It's ten minutes
past six. And, pray, why are you using this wood? It's impossible to
get oneself warm by such a fire as this."

"I believe, sir, that Thomas--"

"Don't talk to me of Thomas. Send dinner in directly."

About five minutes elapsed, spent by the hungry Squire in all sorts
of impatient ways--attacking Thomas, who came in to look after
the fire; knocking the logs about, scattering out sparks, but
considerably lessening the chances of warmth; touching up the
candles, which appeared to him to give a light unusually insufficient
for the large cold room. While he was doing this, Osborne came in
dressed in full evening dress. He always moved slowly; and this, to
begin with, irritated the Squire. Then an uncomfortable consciousness
of a black coat, drab trousers, checked cotton cravat, and splashed
boots, forced itself upon him as he saw Osborne's point-device
costume. He chose to consider it affectation and finery in Osborne,
and was on the point of bursting out with some remark, when the
butler, who had watched Osborne downstairs before making the
announcement, came in to say dinner was ready.

"It surely isn't six o'clock?" said Osborne, pulling out his dainty
little watch. He was scarcely more unaware than it of the storm that
was brewing.

"Six o'clock! It's more than a quarter past," growled out his father.

"I fancy your watch must be wrong, sir. I set mine by the Horse
Guards only two days ago."

Now, impugning that old steady, turnip-shaped watch of the Squire's
was one of the insults which, as it could not reasonably be resented,
was not to be forgiven. That watch had been given him by his
father when watches were watches long ago. It had given the law to
house-clocks, stable-clocks, kitchen-clocks--nay, even to Hamley
Church clock in its day; and was it now, in its respectable old age,
to be looked down upon by a little whipper-snapper of a French watch
which could go into a man's waistcoat pocket, instead of having to
be extricated, with due effort, like a respectable watch of size and
position, from a fob in the waistband? No! not if the whipper-snapper
were backed by all the Horse Guards that ever were, with the Life
Guards to boot. Poor Osborne might have known better than to cast
this slur on his father's flesh and blood; for so dear did he hold
his watch!

"My watch is like myself," said the squire, 'girning,' as the Scotch
say--"plain, but steady-going. At any rate, it gives the law in my
house. The King may go by the Horse Guards if he likes."

"I beg your pardon, sir," said Osborne, really anxious to keep the
peace, "I went by my watch, which is certainly right by London time;
and I'd no idea you were waiting for me; otherwise I could have
dressed much quicker."

"I should think so," said the Squire, looking sarcastically at his
son's attire. "When I was a young man I should have been ashamed to
have spent as much time at my looking-glass as if I'd been a girl.
I could make myself as smart as any one when I was going to a dance,
or to a party where I was likely to meet pretty girls; but I should
have laughed myself to scorn if I'd stood fiddle-faddling at a glass,
smirking at my own likeness, all for my own pleasure."

Osborne reddened, and was on the point of letting fly some caustic
remark on his father's dress at the present moment; but he contented
himself with saying, in a low voice,--

"My mother always expected us all to dress for dinner. I got into the
habit of doing it to please her, and I keep it up now." Indeed, he
had a certain kind of feeling of loyalty to her memory in keeping
up all the little domestic habits and customs she had instituted or
preferred. But the contrast which the Squire thought was implied by
Osborne's remark, put him beside himself.

"And I, too, try to attend to her wishes. I do; and in more important
things. I did when she was alive; and I do so now."

"I never said you did not," said Osborne, astonished at his father's
passionate words and manner.

"Yes, you did, sir. You meant it. I could see by your looks. I saw
you look at my morning coat. At any rate, I never neglected any wish
of hers in her lifetime. If she'd wished me to go to school again
and learn my A, B, C, I would. By ---- I would; and I wouldn't have
gone playing me, and lounging away my time, for fear of vexing and
disappointing her. Yet some folks older than school-boys--"

The squire choked here; but though the words would not come his
passion did not diminish. "I'll not have you casting up your mother's
wishes to me, sir. You, who went near to break her heart at last!"

Osborne was strongly tempted to get up and leave the room. Perhaps it
would have been better if he had; it might then have brought about
an explanation, and a reconciliation between father and son. But he
thought he did well in sitting still and appearing to take no notice.
This indifference to what he was saying appeared to annoy the Squire
still more, and he kept on grumbling and talking to himself till
Osborne, unable to bear it any longer, said, very quietly, but very
bitterly--

"I am only a cause of irritation to you, and home is no longer home
to me, but a place in which I am to be controlled in trifles, and
scolded about trifles as if I were a child. Put me in a way of making
a living for myself--that much your oldest son has a right to ask of
you--I will then leave this house, and you shall be no longer vexed
by my dress, or my want of punctuality."

"You make your request pretty much as another son did long ago: 'Give
me the portion that falleth to me.' But I don't think what he did
with his money is much encouragement for me to--." Then the thought
of how little he could give his son his "portion," or any part of it,
stopped the Squire.

Osborne took up the speech.

"I'm as ready as any man to earn my living; only the preparation for
any profession will cost money, and money I haven't got."

"No more have I," said the Squire, shortly.

"What is to be done then?" said Osborne, only half believing his
father's words.

"Why, you must learn to stop at home, and not take expensive
journeys; and you must reduce your tailor's bill. I don't ask you
to help me in the management of the land--you're far too fine a
gentleman for that; but if you can't earn money, at least you needn't
spend it."

"I've told you I'm willing enough to earn money," cried Osborne,
passionately at last. "But how am I to do it? You really are very
unreasonable, sir."

"Am I?" said the Squire--cooling in manner, though not in temper, as
Osborne grew warm. "But I don't set up for being reasonable; men who
have to pay away money that they haven't got for their extravagant
sons aren't likely to be reasonable. There's two things you've gone
and done which put me beside myself, when I think of them; you've
turned out next door to a dunce at college, when your poor mother
thought so much of you--and when you might have pleased and gratified
her so if you chose--and, well! I won't say what the other thing is."

"Tell me, sir," said Osborne, almost breathless with the idea that
his father had discovered his secret marriage; but the father was
thinking of the money-lenders, who were calculating how soon Osborne
would come into the estate.

"No!" said the Squire. "I know what I know; and I'm not going to
tell you how I know it. Only, I'll just say this--your friends no
more know a piece of good timber when they see it than you or I know
how you could earn five pounds if it was to keep you from starving.
Now, there's Roger--we none of us made an ado about him; but he'll
have his Fellowship now, I'll warrant him, and be a bishop, or a
chancellor, or something, before we've found out he's clever--we've
been so much taken up thinking about you. I don't know what's come
over me to speak of 'we'--'we' in this way," said he, suddenly
dropping his voice,--a change of tone as sad as sad could be. "I
ought to say 'I;' it will be 'I' for evermore in this world."

He got up and left the room in quick haste, knocking over his chair,
and not stopping to pick it up. Osborne, who was sitting and shading
his eyes with his hand, as he had been doing for some time, looked up
at the noise, and then rose as quickly and hurried after his father,
only in time to hear the study-door locked on the inside the moment
he reached it.

Osborne returned into the dining-room chagrined and sorrowful. But he
was always sensitive to any omission of the usual observances, which
might excite remark; and even with his heavy heart he was careful to
pick up the fallen chair, and restore it to its place near the bottom
of the table; and afterwards so to disturb the dishes as to make it
appear that they had been touched, before ringing for Robinson. When
the latter came in, followed by Thomas, Osborne thought it necessary
to say to him that his father was not well, and had gone into the
study; and that he himself wanted no dessert, but would have a cup
of coffee in the drawing-room. The old butler sent Thomas out of the
room, and came up confidentially to Osborne.

"I thought master wasn't justly himself, Mr. Osborne, before dinner.
And, therefore, I made excuses for him--I did. He spoke to Thomas
about the fire, sir, which is a thing I could in nowise put up
with, unless by reason of sickness, which I am always ready to make
allowances for."

"Why shouldn't my father speak to Thomas?" said Osborne. "But,
perhaps, he spoke angrily, I daresay; for I'm sure he's not well."

"No, Mr. Osborne, it wasn't that. I myself am given to anger; and I'm
blessed with as good health as any man in my years. Besides, anger's
a good thing for Thomas. He needs a deal of it. But it should come
from the right quarter--and that is me, myself, Mr. Osborne. I know
my place, and I know my rights and duties as well as any butler that
lives. And it's my duty to scold Thomas, and not master's. Master
ought to have said, 'Robinson! you must speak to Thomas about letting
out the fire,' and I'd ha' given it him well,--as I shall do now,
for that matter. But as I said before, I make excuses for master,
as being in mental distress and bodily ill-health; so I've brought
myself round not to give warning, as I should ha' done, for certain,
under happier circumstances."

"Really, Robinson, I think it's all great nonsense," said Osborne,
weary of the long story the butler had told him, and to which he
had not half attended. "What in the world does it signify whether
my father speaks to you or to Thomas? Bring me coffee in the
drawing-room, and don't trouble your head any more about scolding
Thomas."

Robinson went away offended at his grievance being called nonsense.
He kept muttering to himself in the intervals of scolding Thomas, and
saying,--"Things is a deal changed since poor missis went. I don't
wonder master feels it, for I'm sure I do. She was a lady who had
always a becoming respect for a butler's position, and could have
understood how he might be hurt in his mind. She'd never ha' called
his delicacies of feelings nonsense--not she; no more would Mr.
Roger. He's a merry young gentleman, and over fond of bringing dirty,
slimy creatures into the house; but he's always a kind word for a man
who is hurt in his mind. He'd cheer up the Squire, and keep him from
getting so cross and wilful. I wish Mr. Roger was here, I do."

The poor Squire, shut up with his grief, and his ill-temper as well,
in the dingy, dreary study where he daily spent more and more of
his indoors life, turned over his cares and troubles till he was as
bewildered with the process as a squirrel must be in going round in
a cage. He had out day-books and ledgers, and was calculating up
back-rents; and every time the sum-totals came to different amounts.
He could have cried like a child over his sums; he was worn out and
weary, angry and disappointed. He closed his books at last with a
bang.

"I'm getting old," he said, "and my head's less clear than it used to
be. I think sorrow for her has dazed me. I never was much to boast
on; but she thought a deal of me--bless her! She'd never let me call
myself stupid; but, for all that, I am stupid. Osborne ought to help
me. He's had money enough spent on his learning; but, instead, he
comes down dressed like a popinjay, and never troubles his head to
think how I'm to pay his debts. I wish I'd told him to earn his
living as a dancing-master," said the squire, with a sad smile at his
own wit. "He's dressed for all the world like one. And how he's spent
the money no one knows! Perhaps Roger will turn up some day with a
heap of creditors at his heels. No, he won't--not Roger; he may be
slow, but he's steady, is old Roger. I wish he was here. He's not the
eldest son, but he'd take an interest in the estate; and he'd do up
these weary accounts for me. I wish Roger was here!"




CHAPTER XXIII.

OSBORNE HAMLEY REVIEWS HIS POSITION.


Osborne had his solitary cup of coffee in the drawing-room. He was
very unhappy too, after his fashion. He stood on the hearth-rug
pondering over his situation. He was not exactly aware how hardly
his father was pressed for ready-money; the Squire had never spoken
to him on the subject without being angry; and many of his loose
contradictory statements--all of which, however contradictory they
might appear, had their basis in truth--were set down by his son
to the exaggeration of passion. But it was uncomfortable enough to
a young man of Osborne's age to feel himself continually hampered
for want of a five-pound note. The principal supplies for the
liberal--almost luxurious table at the Hall, came off the estate; so
that there was no appearance of poverty as far as the household went;
and as long as Osborne was content at home, he had everything he
could wish for; but he had a wife elsewhere--he wanted to see her
continually--and that necessitated journeys. She, poor thing! had to
be supported--where was the money for the journeys and for AimÄe's
modest wants to come from? That was the puzzle in Osborne's mind
just now. While he had been at college his allowance--heir of the
Hamleys--had been three hundred, while Roger had to be content with a
hundred less. The payment of these annual sums had given the Squire
a good deal of trouble; but he thought of it as a merely temporary
inconvenience; perhaps unreasonably thought so. Osborne was to
do great things; take high honours, get a fellowship, marry a
long-descended heiress, live in some of the many uninhabited rooms at
the Hall, and help the squire in the management of the estate that
would some time be his. Roger was to be a clergyman; steady, slow
Roger was just fitted for that, and when he declined entering the
Church, preferring a life of more activity and adventure, Roger was
to be--anything; he was useful and practical, and fit for all the
employments from which Osborne was shut out by his fastidiousness,
and his (pseudo) genius; so it was well he was an eldest son, for he
would never have done to struggle through the world; and as for his
settling down to a profession, it would be like cutting blocks with
a razor! And now here was Osborne, living at home, but longing to be
elsewhere; his allowance stopped in reality; indeed, the punctual
payment of it during the last year or two had been owing to his
mother's exertions; but nothing had been said about its present
cessation by either father or son; money matters were too sore a
subject between them. Every now and then the Squire threw him a
ten-pound note or so; but the sort of suppressed growl with which it
was given, and the entire uncertainty as to when he might receive
such gifts, rendered any calculation based upon their receipt
exceedingly vague and uncertain.

"What in the world can I do to secure an income?" thought Osborne, as
he stood on the hearth-rug, his back to a blazing fire, his cup of
coffee sent up in the rare old china that had belonged to the Hall
for generations; his dress finished, as dress of Osborne's could
hardly fail to be. One could hardly have thought that this elegant
young man, standing there in the midst of comfort that verged on
luxury, should have been turning over that one great problem in his
mind; but so it was. "What can I do to be sure of a present income?
Things cannot go on as they are. I should need support for two or
three years, even if I entered myself at the Temple, or Lincoln's
Inn. It would be impossible to live on my pay in the army; besides,
I should hate that profession. In fact, there are evils attending all
professions--I couldn't bring myself to become a member of any I've
ever heard of. Perhaps I'm more fitted to take 'orders' than anything
else; but to be compelled to write weekly sermons whether one had
anything to say or not, and, probably, doomed only to associate with
people below one in refinement and education! Yet poor AimÄe must
have money. I can't bear to compare our dinners here, overloaded with
joints and game and sweets, as Morgan will persist in sending them
up, with AimÄe's two little mutton-chops. Yet what would my father
say if he knew I'd married a Frenchwoman? In his present mood he'd
disinherit me, if that is possible; and he'd speak about her in a way
I couldn't stand. A Roman Catholic, too! Well, I don't repent it. I'd
do it again. Only if my mother had been in good health--if she could
have heard my story, and known AimÄe! As it is I must keep it secret;
but where to get money? Where to get money?"

Then he bethought him of his poems--would they sell, and bring him
in money? In spite of Milton, he thought they might; and he went to
fetch his MSS. out of his room. He sate down near the fire, trying to
study them with a critical eye, to represent public opinion as far as
he could. He had changed his style since the Mrs. Hemans' days. He
was essentially imitative in his poetic faculty; and of late he had
followed the lead of a popular writer of sonnets. He turned his poems
over: they were almost equivalent to an autobiographical passage in
his life. Arranging them in their order, they came as follows:--

"To AimÄe, Walking with a Little Child."

"To AimÄe, Singing at her Work."

"To AimÄe, Turning away from me while I told my Love."

"AimÄe's Confession."

"AimÄe in Despair."

"The Foreign Land in which my AimÄe dwells."

"The Wedding Ring."

"The Wife."

When he came to this last sonnet he put down his bundle of papers
and began to think. "The wife." Yes, and a French wife; and a
Roman Catholic wife--and a wife who might be said to have been in
service! And his father's hatred of the French, both collectively
and individually--collectively, as tumultuous brutal ruffians,
who murdered their king, and committed all kinds of bloody
atrocities--individually, as represented by "Boney," and the various
caricatures of "Johnny Crapaud" that had been in full circulation
about five-and-twenty years before this time, when the Squire had
been young and capable of receiving impressions. As for the form of
religion in which Mrs. Osborne Hamley had been brought up, it is
enough to say that Catholic emancipation had begun to be talked about
by some politicians, and that the sullen roar of the majority of
Englishmen, at the bare idea of it, was surging in the distance with
ominous threatenings; the very mention of such a measure before the
Squire was, as Osborne well knew, like shaking a red flag before a
bull.

And then he considered that if AimÄe had had the unspeakable, the
incomparable blessing of being born of English parents, in the very
heart of England--Warwickshire, for instance--and had never heard
of priests, or mass, or confession, or the Pope, or Guy Fawkes, but
had been born, baptized, and bred in the Church of England, without
having ever seen the outside of a dissenting meeting-house, or a
papist chapel--even with all these advantages, her having been a
(what was the equivalent for "bonne" in English? 'nursery-governess'
was a term hardly invented) nursery-maid, with wages paid down once a
quarter, liable to be dismissed at a month's warning, and having her
tea and sugar doled out to her, would be a shock to his father's old
ancestral pride that he would hardly ever get over.

"If he saw her!" thought Osborne. "If he could but see her!" But if
the Squire were to see AimÄe, he would also hear her speak her pretty
broken English--precious to her husband, as it was in it that she
had confessed brokenly with her English tongue, that she loved him
soundly with her French heart--and Squire Hamley piqued himself on
being a good hater of the French. "She would make such a loving,
sweet, docile little daughter to my father--she would go as near as
any one could towards filling up the blank void in this house, if he
would but have her; but he won't; he never would; and he sha'n't have
the opportunity of scouting her. Yet if I called her 'Lucy' in these
sonnets; and if they made a great effect--were praised in _Blackwood_
and the _Quarterly_--and all the world was agog to find out the
author; and I told him my secret--I could if I were successful--I
think then he would ask who Lucy was, and I could tell him all then.
If--how I hate 'ifs.' 'If me no ifs.' My life has been based on
'whens;' and first they have turned to 'ifs,' and then they have
vanished away. It was 'when Osborne gets honours,' and then 'if
Osborne,' and then a failure altogether. I said to AimÄe, 'when my
mother sees you,' and now it is 'if my father saw her,' with a very
faint prospect of its ever coming to pass." So he let the evening
hours flow on and disappear in reveries like these; winding up with
a sudden determination to try the fate of his poems with a publisher,
with the direct expectation of getting money for them, and an
ulterior fancy that, if successful, they might work wonders with his
father.

When Roger came home Osborne did not let a day pass before telling
his brother of his plans. He never did conceal anything long from
Roger; the feminine part of his character made him always desirous of
a confidant, and as sweet sympathy as he could extract. But Roger's
opinion had no effect on Osborne's actions; and Roger knew this full
well. So when Osborne began with--"I want your advice on a plan
I have got in my head," Roger replied: "Some one told me that the
Duke of Wellington's maxim was never to give advice unless he could
enforce its being carried into effect; now I can't do that; and you
know, old boy, you don't follow out my advice when you've got it."

"Not always, I know. Not when it doesn't agree with my own opinion.
You're thinking about this concealment of my marriage; but you're
not up in all the circumstances. You know how fully I meant to have
done it, if there hadn't been that row about my debts; and then my
mother's illness and death. And now you've no conception how my
father is changed--how irritable he has become! Wait till you've been
at home a week! Robinson, Morgan--it's the same with them all; but
worst of all with me."

"Poor fellow!" said Roger; "I thought he looked terribly changed:
shrunken, and his ruddiness of complexion altered."

"Why, he hardly takes half the exercise he used to do, so it's no
wonder. He has turned away all the men off the new works, which used
to be such an interest to him; and because the roan cob stumbled with
him one day, and nearly threw him, he won't ride it; and yet he won't
sell it and buy another, which would be the sensible plan; so there
are two old horses eating their heads off, while he is constantly
talking about money and expense. And that brings me to what I was
going to say. I'm desperately hard up for money, and so I've been
collecting my poems--weeding them well, you know--going over them
quite critically, in fact; and I want to know if you think Deighton
would publish them. You've a name in Cambridge, you know; and I
daresay he would look at them if you offered them to him."

"I can but try," said Roger; "but I'm afraid you won't get much by
them."

"I don't expect much. I'm a new man, and must make my name. I should
be content with a hundred. If I'd a hundred pounds I'd set myself to
do something. I might keep myself and AimÄe by my writings while I
studied for the bar; or, if the worst came to the worst, a hundred
pounds would take us to Australia."

"Australia! Why, Osborne, what could you do there? And leave my
father! I hope you'll never get your hundred pounds, if that's the
use you're to make of it! Why, you'd break the Squire's heart."

"It might have done once," said Osborne, gloomily, "but it wouldn't
now. He looks at me askance, and shies away from conversation with
me. Let me alone for noticing and feeling this kind of thing. It's
this very susceptibility to outward things that gives me what faculty
I have; and it seems to me as if my bread, and my wife's too, were to
depend upon it. You'll soon see for yourself the terms which I am on
with my father!"

Roger did soon see. His father had slipped into a habit of silence
at meal-times--a habit which Osborne, who was troubled and anxious
enough for his own part, had not striven to break. Father and son
sate together, and exchanged all the necessary speeches connected
with the occasion civilly enough; but it was a relief to them when
their intercourse was over, and they separated--the father to brood
over his sorrow and his disappointment, which were real and deep
enough, and the injury he had received from his boy, which was
exaggerated in his mind by his ignorance of the actual steps Osborne
had taken to raise money. If the money-lenders had calculated the
chances of his father's life or death in making their bargain,
Osborne himself had thought only of how soon and how easily he could
get the money requisite for clearing him from all imperious claims
at Cambridge, and for enabling him to follow AimÄe to her home in
Alsace, and for the subsequent marriage. As yet, Roger had never seen
his brother's wife; indeed, he had only been taken into Osborne's
full confidence after all was decided in which his advice could have
been useful. And now, in the enforced separation, Osborne's whole
thought, both the poetical and practical sides of his mind, ran
upon the little wife who was passing her lonely days in farmhouse
lodgings, wondering when her bridegroom husband would come to her
next. With such an engrossing subject, it was, perhaps, no wonder
that he unconsciously neglected his father; but it was none the less
sad at the time, and to be regretted in its consequences.

"I may come in and have a pipe with you, sir, mayn't I?" said Roger,
that first evening, pushing gently against the study-door, which his
father held only half open.

"You'll not like it," said the squire, still holding the door against
him, but speaking in a relenting tone. "The tobacco I use isn't what
young men like. Better go and have a cigar with Osborne."

"No. I want to sit with you, and I can stand pretty strong tobacco."

Roger pushed in, the resistance slowly giving way before him.

"It will make your clothes smell. You'll have to borrow Osborne's
scents to sweeten yourself," said the Squire, grimly, at the same
time pushing a short smart amber-mouthed pipe to his son.

"No; I'll have a churchwarden. Why, father, do you think I'm a baby
to put up with a doll's head like this?" looking at the carving upon
it.

The Squire was pleased in his heart, though he did not choose to
show it. He only said, "Osborne brought it me when he came back from
Germany. That's three years ago." And then for some time they smoked
in silence. But the voluntary companionship of his son was very
soothing to the Squire, though not a word might be said.

The next speech he made showed the direction of his thoughts; indeed,
his words were always a transparent medium through which the current
might be seen.

"A deal of a man's life comes and goes in three years--I've found
that out;" and he puffed away at his pipe again. While Roger was
turning over in his mind what answer to make to this truism, the
squire again stopped his smoking and spoke.

"I remember when there was all that fuss about the Prince of
Wales being made regent, I read somewhere--I daresay it was in a
newspaper--that kings and their heirs-apparent were always on bad
terms. Osborne was quite a little chap then: he used to go out riding
with me on White Surrey;--you won't remember the pony we called White
Surrey?"

"I remember it; but I thought it a tall horse in those days."

"Ah! that was because you were such a small lad, you know. I'd seven
horses in the stable then--not counting the farm-horses. I don't
recollect having a care then, except--_she_ was always delicate, you
know. But what a beautiful boy Osborne was! He was always dressed in
black velvet--it was a foppery, but it wasn't my doing, and it was
all right, I'm sure. He's a handsome fellow now, but the sunshine has
gone out of his face."

"He's a good deal troubled about this money, and the anxiety he has
given you," said Roger, rather taking his brother's feelings for
granted.

"Not he," said the Squire, taking the pipe out of his mouth, and
hitting the bowl so sharply against the hob that it broke in pieces.
"There! But never mind! I say, not he, Roger! He's none troubled
about the money. It's easy getting money from Jews if you're the
eldest son, and the heir. They just ask, 'How old is your father, and
has he had a stroke, or a fit?' and it's settled out of hand, and
then they come prowling about a place, and running down the timber
and land--Don't let us speak of him; it's no good, Roger. He and I
are out of tune, and it seems to me as if only God Almighty could
put us to rights. It's thinking of how he grieved _her_ at last that
makes me so bitter with him. And yet there's a deal of good in him!
and he's so quick and clever, if only he'd give his mind to things.
Now, you were always slow, Roger--all your masters used to say so."

Roger laughed a little--

"Yes; I'd many a nickname at school for my slowness," said he.

"Never mind!" said the Squire, consolingly. "I'm sure I don't. If you
were a clever fellow like Osborne yonder, you'd be all for caring for
books and writing, and you'd perhaps find it as dull as he does to
keep company with a bumpkin-squire Jones like me. Yet, I daresay,
they think a deal of you at Cambridge," said he, after a pause,
"since you've got this fine wranglership; I'd nearly forgotten
that--the news came at such a miserable time."

"Well, yes! They're always proud of the senior wrangler of the year
up at Cambridge. Next year I must abdicate."

The Squire sat and gazed into the embers, still holding his useless
pipe-stem. At last he said, in a low voice, as if scarcely aware he
had got a listener,--"I used to write to her when she was away in
London, and tell her the home news. But no letter will reach her now!
Nothing reaches her!"

Roger started up.

"Where's the tobacco-box, father? Let me fill you another pipe!"
and when he had done so, he stooped over his father and stroked his
cheek. The Squire shook his head.

"You've only just come home, lad. You don't know me, as I am
now-a-days! Ask Robinson--I won't have you asking Osborne, he ought
to keep it to himself--but any of the servants will tell you I'm not
like the same man for getting into passions with them. I used to
be reckoned a good master, but that's past now! Osborne was once a
little boy, and she was once alive--and I was once a good master--a
good master--yes! It's all past now."

He took up his pipe, and began to smoke afresh, and Roger, after a
silence of some minutes, began a long story about some Cambridge
man's misadventure on the hunting-field, telling it with such humour
that the Squire was beguiled into hearty laughing. When they rose to
go to bed his father said to Roger,--

"Well, we've had a pleasant evening--at least, I have. But perhaps
you haven't; for I'm but poor company now, I know."

"I don't know when I've passed a happier evening, father," said
Roger. And he spoke truly, though he did not trouble himself to find
out the cause of his happiness.




CHAPTER XXIV.

MRS. GIBSON'S LITTLE DINNER.


[Illustration (untitled)]

All this had taken place before Roger's first meeting with Molly and
Cynthia at Miss Brownings'; and the little dinner on the Friday at
Mr. Gibson's, which followed in due sequence.

Mrs. Gibson intended the Hamleys to find this dinner pleasant; and
they did. Mr. Gibson was fond of the two young men, both for their
parents' sake and their own, for he had known them since boyhood; and
to those whom he liked Mr. Gibson could be remarkably agreeable. Mrs.
Gibson really gave them a welcome--and cordiality in a hostess is a
very becoming mantle for any other deficiencies there may be. Cynthia
and Molly looked their best, which was all the duty Mrs. Gibson
absolutely required of them, as she was willing enough to take her
full share in the conversation. Osborne fell to her lot, of course,
and for some time he and she prattled on with all the ease of manner
and commonplaceness of meaning which go far to make the "art of
polite conversation." Roger, who ought to have made himself agreeable
to one or the other of the young ladies, was exceedingly interested
in what Mr. Gibson was telling him of a paper on comparative
osteology in some foreign journal of science, which Lord Hollingford
was in the habit of forwarding to his friend the country surgeon.
Yet, every now and then while he listened, he caught his attention
wandering to the face of Cynthia, who was placed between his brother
and Mr. Gibson. She was not particularly occupied with attending to
anything that was going on; her eyelids were carelessly dropped, as
she crumbled her bread on the tablecloth, and her beautiful long
eyelashes were seen on the clear tint of her oval cheek. She was
thinking of something else; Molly was trying to understand with all
her might. Suddenly Cynthia looked up, and caught Roger's gaze of
intent admiration too fully for her to be unaware that he was staring
at her. She coloured a little; but, after the first moment of rosy
confusion at his evident admiration of her, she flew to the attack,
diverting his confusion at thus being caught, to the defence of
himself from her accusation.

"It is quite true!" she said to him. "I was not attending: you see
I don't know even the A B C of science. But, please, don't look so
severely at me, even if I am a dunce!"

"I didn't know--I didn't mean to look severely, I am sure," replied
he, not knowing well what to say.

"Cynthia is not a dunce either," said Mrs. Gibson, afraid lest her
daughter's opinion of herself might be taken seriously. "But I have
always observed that some people have a talent for one thing and
some for another. Now Cynthia's talents are not for science and the
severer studies. Do you remember, love, what trouble I had to teach
you the use of the globes?"

"Yes; and I don't know longitude from latitude now; and I'm always
puzzled as to which is perpendicular and which is horizontal."

"Yet, I do assure you," her mother continued, rather addressing
herself to Osborne, "that her memory for poetry is prodigious. I have
heard her repeat the 'Prisoner of Chillon' from beginning to end."

"It would be rather a bore to have to hear her, I think," said Mr.
Gibson, smiling at Cynthia, who gave him back one of her bright looks
of mutual understanding.

"Ah, Mr. Gibson, I have found out before now that you have no soul
for poetry; and Molly there is your own child. She reads such deep
books--all about facts and figures: she'll be quite a blue-stocking
by-and-by."

"Mamma," said Molly, reddening, "you think it was a deep book because
there were the shapes of the different cells of bees in it! but it
was not at all deep. It was very interesting."

"Never mind, Molly," said Osborne. "I stand up for blue-stockings."

"And I object to the distinction implied in what you say," said
Roger. "It was not deep, _ergo_, it was very interesting. Now, a book
may be both deep and interesting."

"Oh, if you are going to chop logic and use Latin words, I think it
is time for us to leave the room," said Mrs. Gibson.

"Don't let us run away as if we were beaten, mamma," said Cynthia.
"Though it may be logic, I, for one, can understand what Mr. Roger
Hamley said just now; and I read some of Molly's books; and whether
it was deep or not I found it very interesting--more so than I should
think the 'Prisoner of Chillon' now-a-days. I've displaced the
Prisoner to make room for Johnnie Gilpin as my favourite poem."

"How could you talk such nonsense, Cynthia!" said Mrs. Gibson, as the
girls followed her upstairs. "You know you are not a dunce. It is all
very well not to be a blue-stocking, because gentle-people don't like
that kind of woman; but running yourself down, and contradicting all
I said about your liking for Byron, and poets and poetry--to Osborne
Hamley of all men, too!"

Mrs. Gibson spoke quite crossly for her.

"But, mamma," Cynthia replied, "I am either a dunce, or I am not. If
I am, I did right to own it; if I am not, he's a dunce if he doesn't
find out I was joking."

"Well," said Mrs. Gibson, a little puzzled by this speech, and
wanting some elucidatory addition.

"Only that if he's a dunce his opinion of me is worth nothing. So,
any way, it doesn't signify."

"You really bewilder me with your nonsense, child. Molly is worth
twenty of you."

"I quite agree with you, mamma," said Cynthia, turning round to take
Molly's hand.

"Yes; but she ought not to be," said Mrs. Gibson, still irritated.
"Think of the advantages you've had."

"I'm afraid I had rather be a dunce than a blue-stocking," said
Molly; for the term had a little annoyed her, and the annoyance was
rankling still.

"Hush; here they are coming: I hear the dining-room door! I never
meant you were a blue-stocking, dear, so don't look vexed.--Cynthia,
my love, where did you get those lovely flowers--anemones, are they?
They suit your complexion so exactly."

"Come, Molly, don't look so grave and thoughtful," exclaimed Cynthia.
"Don't you perceive mamma wants us to be smiling and amiable?"

Mr. Gibson had had to go out to his evening round; and the young men
were all too glad to come up into the pretty drawing-room; the bright
little wood-fire; the comfortable easy-chairs which, with so small
a party, might be drawn round the hearth; the good-natured hostess;
the pretty, agreeable girls. Roger sauntered up to the corner where
Cynthia was standing, playing with a hand-screen.

"There is a charity ball in Hollingford soon, isn't there?" asked he.

"Yes; on Easter Tuesday," she replied.

"Are you going? I suppose you are?"

"Yes; mamma is going to take Molly and me."

"You will enjoy it very much--going together?"

For the first time during this little conversation she glanced up at
him--real honest pleasure shining out of her eyes.

"Yes; going together will make the enjoyment of the thing. It would
be dull without her."

"You are great friends, then?" he asked.

"I never thought I should like any one so much,--any girl I mean."

She put in the final reservation in all simplicity of heart; and in
all simplicity did he understand it. He came ever so little nearer,
and dropped his voice a little.

"I was so anxious to know. I am so glad. I have often wondered how
you two were getting on."

"Have you?" said she, looking up again. "At Cambridge? You must be
very fond of Molly!"

"Yes, I am. She was with us so long; and at such a time! I look upon
her almost as a sister."

"And she is very fond of all of you. I seem to know you all from
hearing her talk about you so much.--All of you!" said she, laying an
emphasis on "all" to show that it included the dead as well as the
living. Roger was silent for a minute or two.

"I didn't know you, even by hearsay. So you mustn't wonder that I was
a little afraid. But as soon as I saw you I knew how it must be; and
it was such a relief!"

"Cynthia," said Mrs. Gibson, who thought that the younger son had had
quite his share of low, confidential conversation, "come here, and
sing that little French ballad to Mr. Osborne Hamley."

"Which do you mean, mamma? 'Tu t'en repentiras, Colin?'"

"Yes; such a pretty, playful little warning to young men," said Mrs.
Gibson, smiling up at Osborne. "The refrain is--

   Tu t'en repentiras, Colin,
     Tu t'en repentiras,
   Car si tu prends une femme, Colin,
     Tu t'en repentiras.

The advice may apply very well when there is a French wife in the
case; but not, I am sure, to an Englishman who is thinking of an
English wife."


[Illustration: "TU T'EN REPENTIRAS, COLIN."]


This choice of a song was exceedingly _mal-łpropos_, had Mrs. Gibson
but known it. Osborne and Roger knowing that the wife of the former
was a Frenchwoman, and, conscious of each other's knowledge, felt
doubly awkward; while Molly was as much confused as though she
herself were secretly married. However, Cynthia carolled the saucy
ditty out, and her mother smiled at it, in total ignorance of any
application it might have. Osborne had instinctively gone to stand
behind Cynthia, as she sate at the piano, so as to be ready to turn
over the leaves of her music if she required it. He kept his hands
in his pockets and his eyes fixed on her fingers; his countenance
clouded with gravity at all the merry quips which she so playfully
sang. Roger looked grave as well, but was much more at his ease than
his brother; indeed, he was half-amused by the awkwardness of the
situation. He caught Molly's troubled eyes and heightened colour, and
he saw that she was feeling this _contretemps_ more seriously than
she needed to do. He moved to a seat by her, and half whispered, "Too
late a warning, is it not?"

Molly looked up at him as he leant towards her, and replied in the
same tone--"Oh, I am so sorry!"

"You need not be. He won't mind it long; and a man must take the
consequences when he puts himself in a false position."

Molly could not tell what to reply to this, so she hung her head
and kept silence. Yet she could see that Roger did not change his
attitude or remove his hand from the back of his chair, and, impelled
by curiosity to find out the cause of his stillness, she looked up at
him at length, and saw his gaze fixed on the two who were near the
piano. Osborne was saying something eagerly to Cynthia, whose grave
eyes were upturned to him with soft intentness of expression, and her
pretty mouth half-open, with a sort of impatience for him to cease
speaking, that she might reply.

"They are talking about France," said Roger, in answer to Molly's
unspoken question. "Osborne knows it well, and Miss Kirkpatrick has
been at school there, you know. It sounds very interesting; shall we
go nearer and hear what they are saying?"

It was all very well to ask this civilly, but Molly thought it would
have been better to wait for her answer. Instead of waiting, however,
Roger went to the piano, and, leaning on it, appeared to join in the
light merry talk, while he feasted his eyes as much as he dared by
looking at Cynthia. Molly suddenly felt as if she could scarcely keep
from crying--a minute ago he had been so near to her, and talking so
pleasantly and confidentially; and now he almost seemed as if he had
forgotten her existence. She thought that all this was wrong; and
she exaggerated its wrongness to herself; "mean," and "envious of
Cynthia," and "ill-natured," and "selfish," were the terms she kept
applying to herself; but it did no good, she was just as naughty at
the last as at the first.

Mrs. Gibson broke into the state of things which Molly thought was to
endure for ever. Her work had been intricate up to this time, and had
required a great deal of counting; so she had had no time to attend
to her duties, one of which she always took to be to show herself to
the world as an impartial stepmother. Cynthia had played and sung,
and now she must give Molly her turn of exhibition. Cynthia's singing
and playing was light and graceful, but anything but correct; but
she herself was so charming, that it was only fanatics for music who
cared for false chords and omitted notes. Molly, on the contrary, had
an excellent ear, if she had ever been well taught; and both from
inclination and conscientious perseverance of disposition, she would
go over an incorrect passage for twenty times. But she was very shy
of playing in company; and when forced to do it, she went through her
performance heavily, and hated her handiwork more than any one.

"Now, you must play a little, Molly," said Mrs. Gibson; "play us that
beautiful piece of Kalkbrenner's, my dear."

Molly looked up at her stepmother with beseeching eyes; but it only
brought out another form of request, still more like a command.

"Go at once, my dear. You may not play it quite rightly; and I know
you are very nervous; but you're quite amongst friends."

So there was a disturbance made in the little group at the piano, and
Molly sate down to her martyrdom.

"Please, go away!" said she to Osborne, who was standing behind her
ready to turn over. "I can quite well do it for myself. And oh! if
you would but talk!"

Osborne remained where he was in spite of her appeal, and gave
her what little approval she got; for Mrs. Gibson, exhausted by
her previous labour of counting her stitches, fell asleep in her
comfortable sofa-corner near the fire; and Roger, who began at first
to talk a little in compliance with Molly's request, found his
conversation with Cynthia so agreeable, that Molly lost her place
several times in trying to catch a sudden glimpse of Cynthia sitting
at her work, and Roger by her, intent on catching her low replies to
what he was saying.

"There, now I've done!" said Molly, standing up quickly as soon as
she had finished the eighteen dreary pages; "and I think I will never
sit down to play again!"

Osborne laughed at her vehemence. Cynthia began to take some part
in what was being said, and thus made the conversation general. Mrs.
Gibson wakened up gracefully, as was her way of doing all things, and
slid into the subjects they were talking about so easily, that she
almost succeeded in making them believe she had never been asleep at
all.




CHAPTER XXV.

HOLLINGFORD IN A BUSTLE.


All Hollingford felt as if there was a great deal to be done before
Easter this year. There was Easter proper, which always required new
clothing of some kind, for fear of certain consequences from little
birds, who were supposed to resent the impiety of those that did
not wear some new article of dress on Easter-day. And most ladies
considered it wiser that the little birds should see the new article
for themselves, and not have to take it upon trust, as they would
have to do if it were merely a pocket-handkerchief, or a petticoat,
or any article of under-clothing. So piety demanded a new bonnet, or
a new gown; and was barely satisfied with an Easter pair of gloves.
Miss Rose was generally very busy just before Easter in Hollingford.
Then this year there was the charity ball. Ashcombe, Hollingford, and
Coreham were three neighbouring towns, of about the same number of
population, lying at the three equidistant corners of a triangle. In
imitation of greater cities with their festivals, these three towns
had agreed to have an annual ball for the benefit of the county
hospital to be held in turn at each place; and Hollingford was to be
the place this year.

It was a fine time for hospitality, and every house of any pretension
was as full as it could hold, and flys were engaged long months
before.

If Mrs. Gibson could have asked Osborne, or in default, Roger Hamley
to go to the ball with them and to sleep at their house,--or if,
indeed, she could have picked up any stray scion of a "county family"
to whom such an offer would have been a convenience, she would have
restored her own dressing-room to its former use as the spare-room,
with pleasure. But she did not think it was worth her while to put
herself out for any of the humdrum and ill-dressed women who had been
her former acquaintances at Ashcombe. For Mr. Preston it might have
been worth while to give up her room, considering him in the light of
a handsome and prosperous young man, and a good dancer besides. But
there were more lights in which he was to be viewed. Mr. Gibson, who
really wanted to return the hospitality shown to him by Mr. Preston
at the time of his marriage, had yet an instinctive distaste to the
man, which no wish of freeing himself from obligation, nor even the
more worthy feeling of hospitality, could overcome. Mrs. Gibson
had some old grudges of her own against him, but she was not one
to retain angry feelings, or be very active in her retaliation;
she was afraid of Mr. Preston, and admired him at the same time.
It was awkward too--so she said--to go into a ball-room without
any gentleman at all, and Mr. Gibson was so uncertain! On the
whole--partly for this last-given reason, and partly because
conciliation was the best policy, Mrs. Gibson was slightly in favour
of inviting Mr. Preston to be their guest. But as soon as Cynthia
heard the question discussed--or rather, as soon as she heard it
discussed in Mr. Gibson's absence, she said that if Mr. Preston came
to be their visitor on the occasion, she for one would not go to the
ball at all. She did not speak with vehemence or in anger; but with
such quiet resolution that Molly looked up in surprise. She saw
that Cynthia was keeping her eyes fixed on her work, and that she
had no intention of meeting any one's gaze, or giving any further
explanation. Mrs. Gibson, too, looked perplexed, and once or twice
seemed on the point of asking some question; but she was not angry
as Molly had fully expected. She watched Cynthia furtively and in
silence for a minute or two, and then said that, after all, she could
not conveniently give up her dressing-room; and, altogether, they had
better say no more about it. So no stranger was invited to stay at
Mr. Gibson's at the time of the ball; but Mrs. Gibson openly spoke
of her regret at the unavoidable inhospitality, and hoped that they
might be able to build an addition to their house before the next
triennial Hollingford ball.

Another cause of unusual bustle at Hollingford this Easter was the
expected return of the family to the Towers, after their unusually
long absence. Mr. Sheepshanks might be seen trotting up and down on
his stout old cob, speaking to attentive masons, plasterers, and
glaziers about putting everything--on the outside at least--about
the cottages belonging to "my lord," in perfect repair. Lord Cumnor
owned the greater part of the town; and those who lived under other
landlords, or in houses of their own, were stirred up by the dread
of contrast to do up their dwellings. So the ladders of whitewashers
and painters were sadly in the way of the ladies tripping daintily
along to make their purchases, and holding their gowns up in a bunch
behind, after a fashion quite gone out in these days. The housekeeper
and steward from the Towers might also be seen coming in to give
orders at the various shops; and stopping here and there at those
kept by favourites, to avail themselves of the eagerly-tendered
refreshments.

Lady Harriet came to call on her old governess the day after the
arrival of the family at the Towers. Molly and Cynthia were out
walking when she came--doing some errands for Mrs. Gibson, who had a
secret idea that Lady Harriet would call at the particular time she
did, and had a not uncommon wish to talk to her ladyship without the
corrective presence of any member of her own family.

Mrs. Gibson did not give Molly the message of remembrance that Lady
Harriet had left for her; but she imparted various pieces of news
relating to the Towers with great animation and interest. The Duchess
of Menteith and her daughter, Lady Alice, were coming to the Towers;
would be there the day of the ball; would come to the ball; and the
Menteith diamonds were famous. That was piece of news the first.
The second was that ever so many gentlemen were coming to the
Towers--some English, some French. This piece of news would have come
first in order of importance had there been much probability of their
being dancing men, and, as such, possible partners at the coming
ball. But Lady Harriet had spoken of them as Lord Hollingford's
friends, useless scientific men in all probability. Then, finally,
Mrs. Gibson was to go to the Towers next day to lunch; Lady Cumnor
had written a little note by Lady Harriet to beg her to come; if
Mrs. Gibson could manage to find her way to the Towers, one of the
carriages in use should bring her back to her own home in the course
of the afternoon.

"The dear countess!" said Mrs. Gibson, with soft affection. It was
a soliloquy, uttered after a minute's pause, at the end of all this
information.

And all the rest of that day her conversation had an aristocratic
perfume hanging about it. One of the few books she had brought with
her into Mr. Gibson's house was bound in pink, and in it she studied
"Menteith, Duke of, Adolphus George," &c., &c., till she was fully up
in all the duchess's connections, and probable interests. Mr. Gibson
made his mouth up into a droll whistle when he came home at night,
and found himself in a Towers' atmosphere. Molly saw the shade
of annoyance through the drollery; she was beginning to see it
oftener than she liked, not that she reasoned upon it, or that she
consciously traced the annoyance to its source; but she could not
help feeling uneasy in herself when she knew her father was in the
least put out.

Of course a fly was ordered for Mrs. Gibson. In the early afternoon
she came home. If she had been disappointed in her interview with
the countess she never told her woe, nor revealed the fact that when
she first arrived at the Towers she had to wait for an hour in Lady
Cumnor's morning-room, uncheered by any companionship save that of
her old friend, Mrs. Bradley, till suddenly, Lady Harriet coming in,
she exclaimed, "Why, Clare! you dear woman! are you here all alone?
Does mamma know?" And, after a little more affectionate conversation,
she rushed to find her ladyship, who was perfectly aware of the fact,
but too deep in giving the duchess the benefit of her wisdom and
experience in trousseaux to be at all aware of the length of time
Mrs. Gibson had been passing in patient solitude. At lunch Mrs.
Gibson was secretly hurt by my lord's supposing it to be her dinner,
and calling out his urgent hospitality from the very bottom of the
table, giving as a reason for it, that she must remember it was her
dinner. In vain she piped out in her soft, high voice, "Oh, my lord!
I never eat meat in the middle of the day; I can hardly eat anything
at lunch." Her voice was lost, and the duchess might go away with the
idea that the Hollingford doctor's wife dined early; that is to say,
if her grace ever condescended to have any idea on the subject at
all; which presupposes that she was cognizant of the fact of there
being a doctor at Hollingford, and that he had a wife, and that his
wife was the pretty, faded, elegant-looking woman sending away her
plate of untasted food--food which she longed to eat, for she was
really desperately hungry after her drive and her solitude.

And then after lunch there did come a _tÉte-ł-tÉte_ with Lady Cumnor,
which was conducted after this wise:--

"Well, Clare! I am really glad to see you. I once thought I should
never get back to the Towers, but here I am! There was such a clever
man at Bath--a Doctor Snape--he cured me at last--quite set me up. I
really think if ever I am ill again I shall send for him: it is such
a thing to find a really clever medical man. Oh, by the way, I always
forget you've married Mr. Gibson--of course he is very clever, and
all that. (The carriage to the door in ten minutes, Brown, and desire
Bradley to bring my things down.) What was I asking you? Oh! how do
you get on with the stepdaughter? She seemed to me to be a young lady
with a pretty stubborn will of her own. I put a letter for the post
down somewhere, and I cannot think where; do help me look for it,
there's a good woman. Just run to my room, and see if Brown can find
it, for it is of great consequence."

Off went Mrs. Gibson, rather unwillingly; for there were several
things she wanted to speak about, and she had not heard half of what
she had expected to learn of the family gossip. But all chance was
gone; for when she came back from her fruitless errand, Lady Cumnor
and the duchess were in full talk, Lady Cumnor with the missing
letter in her hand, which she was using something like a baton to
enforce her words.

"Every iota from Paris! Every i-o-ta!"

Lady Cumnor was too much of a lady not to apologize for useless
trouble, but they were nearly the last words she spoke to Mrs.
Gibson, for she had to go out and drive with the duchess; and the
brougham to take "Clare" (as she persisted in calling Mrs. Gibson)
back to Hollingford followed the carriage to the door. Lady Harriet
came away from her _entourage_ of young men and young ladies, all
prepared for some walking expedition, to wish Mrs. Gibson good-by.

"We shall see you at the ball," she said. "You'll be there with your
two girls, of course, and I must have a little talk with you there;
with all these visitors in the house, it has been impossible to see
anything of you to-day, you know."

Such were the facts, but rose-colour was the medium through which
they were seen by Mrs. Gibson's household listeners on her return.

"There are many visitors staying at the Towers--oh, yes! a great
many: the duchess and Lady Alice, and Mr. and Mrs. Grey, and Lord
Albert Monson and his sister, and my old friend Captain James of the
Blues--many more, in fact. But, of course, I preferred going to Lady
Cumnor's own room, where I could see her and Lady Harriet quietly,
and where we were not disturbed by the bustle downstairs. Of course
we were obliged to go down to lunch, and then I saw my old friends,
and renewed pleasant acquaintances. But I really could hardly get any
connected conversation with any one. Lord Cumnor seemed so delighted
to see me there again: though there were six or seven between us, he
was always interrupting with some civil or kind speech especially
addressed to me. And after lunch Lady Cumnor asked me all sorts of
questions about my new life with as much interest as if I had been
her daughter. To be sure, when the duchess came in we had to leave
off, and talk about the trousseau she is preparing for Lady Alice.
Lady Harriet made such a point of our meeting at the ball; she is
such a good, affectionate creature, is Lady Harriet!"

This last was said in a tone of meditative appreciation.

The afternoon of the day on which the ball was to take place, a
servant rode over from Hamley with two lovely nosegays, "with the
Mr. Hamleys' compliments to Miss Gibson and Miss Kirkpatrick."
Cynthia was the first to receive them. She came dancing into the
drawing-room, flourishing the flowers about in either hand, and
danced up to Molly, who was trying to settle to her reading, by way
of passing the time away till the evening came.

"Look, Molly, look! Here are bouquets for us! Long life to the
givers!"

"Who are they from?" asked Molly, taking hold of one, and examining
it with tender delight at its beauty.

"Who from? Why, the two paragons of Hamleys, to be sure. Is it not a
pretty attention?"

"How kind of them!" said Molly.

"I'm sure it is Osborne who thought of it. He has been so much
abroad, where it is such a common compliment to send bouquets to
young ladies."

"I don't see why you should think it is Osborne's thought!" said
Molly, reddening a little. "Mr. Roger Hamley used to gather nosegays
constantly for his mother, and sometimes for me."

"Well, never mind whose thought it was, or who gathered them; we've
got the flowers, and that's enough. Molly, I'm sure these red flowers
will just match your coral necklace and bracelets," said Cynthia,
pulling out some camellias, then a rare kind of flower.

"Oh, please, don't!" exclaimed Molly. "Don't you see how carefully
the colours are arranged--they have taken such pains; please, don't."

"Nonsense!" said Cynthia, continuing to pull them out; "see, here are
quite enough. I'll make you a little coronet of them--sewn on black
velvet, which will never be seen--just as they do in France!"

"Oh, I am so sorry! It is quite spoilt," said Molly.

"Never mind! I'll take this spoilt bouquet; I can make it up again
just as prettily as ever; and you shall have this, which has never
been touched." Cynthia went on arranging the crimson buds and flowers
to her taste. Molly said nothing, but kept watching Cynthia's nimble
fingers tying up the wreath.

"There!" said Cynthia, at last, "when that is sewn on black velvet,
to keep the flowers from dying, you'll see how pretty it will look.
And there are enough red flowers in this untouched nosegay to carry
out the idea!"

"Thank you" (very slowly). "But sha'n't you mind having only the
wrecks of the other?"

"Not I; red flowers would not go with my pink dress."

"But--I daresay they arranged each nosegay so carefully!"

"Perhaps they did. But I never would allow sentiment to interfere
with my choice of colours; and pink does tie one down. Now you,
in white muslin, just tipped with crimson, like a daisy, may wear
anything."

Cynthia took the utmost pains in dressing Molly, leaving the clever
housemaid to her mother's exclusive service. Mrs. Gibson was more
anxious about her attire than was either of the girls; it had given
her occasion for deep thought and not a few sighs. Her deliberation
had ended in her wearing her pearl-grey satin wedding-gown, with a
profusion of lace, and white and coloured lilacs. Cynthia was the one
who took the affair most lightly. Molly looked upon the ceremony of
dressing for a first ball as rather a serious ceremony; certainly as
an anxious proceeding. Cynthia was almost as anxious as herself; only
Molly wanted her appearance to be correct and unnoticed; and Cynthia
was desirous of setting off Molly's rather peculiar charms--her
cream-coloured skin, her profusion of curly black hair, her beautiful
long-shaped eyes, with their shy, loving expression. Cynthia took
up so much time in dressing Molly to her mind, that she herself had
to perform her toilette in a hurry. Molly, ready dressed, sate on a
low chair in Cynthia's room, watching the pretty creature's rapid
movements, as she stood in her petticoat before the glass, doing up
her hair, with quick certainty of effect. At length, Molly heaved a
long sigh, and said,--

"I should like to be pretty!"

"Why, Molly," said Cynthia, turning round with an exclamation on the
tip of her tongue; but when she caught the innocent, wistful look on
Molly's face, she instinctively checked what she was going to say,
and, half-smiling to her own reflection in the glass, she said,--"The
French girls would tell you, to believe that you were pretty would
make you so."

Molly paused before replying,--

"I suppose they would mean that if you knew you were pretty, you
would never think about your looks; you would be so certain of being
liked, and that it is caring--"

"Listen! that's eight o'clock striking. Don't trouble yourself with
trying to interpret a French girl's meaning, but help me on with my
frock, there's a dear one."

The two girls were dressed, and were standing over the fire waiting
for the carriage in Cynthia's room, when Maria (Betty's successor)
came hurrying into the room. Maria had been officiating as maid to
Mrs. Gibson, but she had had intervals of leisure, in which she had
rushed upstairs, and, under the pretence of offering her services,
had seen the young ladies' dresses, and the sight of so many nice
clothes had sent her into a state of excitement which made her think
nothing of rushing upstairs for the twentieth time, with a nosegay
still more beautiful than the two previous ones.

"Here, Miss Kirkpatrick! No, it's not for you, miss!" as Molly, being
nearer to the door, offered to take it and pass it to Cynthia. "It's
for Miss Kirkpatrick; and there's a note for her besides!"

Cynthia said nothing, but took the note and the flowers. She held the
note so that Molly could read it at the same time she did.


   I send you some flowers; and you must allow me to claim
   the first dance after nine o'clock, before which time I
   fear I cannot arrive.--R. P.


"Who is it?" asked Molly.

Cynthia looked extremely irritated, indignant, perplexed--what was it
turned her cheek so pale, and made her eyes so full of fire?

"It is Mr. Preston," said she, in answer to Molly. "I shall not dance
with him; and here go his flowers--"

Into the very middle of the embers, which she immediately stirred
down upon the beautiful shrivelling petals as if she wished to
annihilate them as soon as possible. Her voice had never been raised;
it was as sweet as usual; nor, though her movements were prompt
enough, were they hasty or violent.

"Oh!" said Molly, "those beautiful flowers! We might have put them in
water."

"No," said Cynthia; "it's best to destroy them. We don't want them;
and I can't bear to be reminded of that man."

"It was an impertinent familiar note," said Molly. "What right had
he to express himself in that way--no beginning, no end, and only
initials! Did you know him well when you were at Ashcombe, Cynthia?"

"Oh, don't let us think any more about him," replied Cynthia. "It is
quite enough to spoil any pleasure at the ball to think that he will
be there. But I hope I shall get engaged before he comes, so that I
can't dance with him--and don't you, either!"

"There! they are calling for us," exclaimed Molly, and with quick
step, yet careful of their draperies, they made their way downstairs
to the place where Mr. and Mrs. Gibson awaited them. Yes; Mr. Gibson
was going,--even if he had to leave them afterwards to attend to any
professional call. And Molly suddenly began to admire her father
as a handsome man, when she saw him now, in full evening attire.
Mrs. Gibson, too--how pretty she was! In short, it was true that no
better-looking a party than these four people entered the Hollingford
ball-room that evening.




CHAPTER XXVI.

A CHARITY BALL.


At the present time there are few people at a public ball besides the
dancers and their chaperones, or relations in some degree interested
in them. But in the days when Molly and Cynthia were young--before
railroads were, and before their consequences, the excursion-trains,
which take every one up to London now-a-days, there to see their fill
of gay crowds and fine dresses--to go to an annual charity-ball, even
though all thought of dancing had passed by years ago, and without
any of the responsibilities of a chaperone, was a very allowable
and favourite piece of dissipation to all the kindly old maids who
thronged the country towns of England. They aired their old lace and
their best dresses; they saw the aristocratic magnates of the country
side; they gossipped with their coevals, and speculated on the
romances of the young around them in a curious yet friendly spirit.
The Miss Brownings would have thought themselves sadly defrauded
of the gayest event of the year, if anything had prevented their
attending the charity ball, and Miss Browning would have been
indignant, Miss Phoebe aggrieved, had they not been asked to
Ashcombe and Coreham, by friends at each place, who had, like them,
gone through the dancing-stage of life some five-and-twenty years
before, but who liked still to haunt the scenes of their former
enjoyment, and see a younger generation dance on "regardless of their
doom." They had come in one of the two sedan-chairs that yet lingered
in use at Hollingford; such a night as this brought a regular harvest
of gains to the two old men who, in what was called the "town's
livery," trotted backwards and forwards with their many loads of
ladies and finery. There were some postchaises, and some "flys," but
after mature deliberation Miss Browning had decided to keep to the
more comfortable custom of the sedan-chair; "which," as she said to
Miss Piper, one of her visitors, "came into the parlour, and got full
of the warm air, and nipped you up, and carried you tight and cosy
into another warm room, where you could walk out without having to
show your legs by going up steps, or down steps." Of course only one
could go at a time; but here again a little of Miss Browning's good
management arranged everything so very nicely, as Miss Hornblower
(their other visitor) remarked. She went first, and remained in the
warm cloak-room until her hostess followed; and then the two ladies
went arm-in-arm into the ball-room, finding out convenient seats
whence they could watch the arrivals and speak to their passing
friends, until Miss Phoebe and Miss Piper entered, and came to take
possession of the seats reserved for them by Miss Browning's care.
These two younger ladies came in, also arm-in-arm, but with a certain
timid flurry in look and movement very different from the composed
dignity of their seniors (by two or three years). When all four
were once more assembled together, they took breath, and began to
converse.

"Upon my word, I really do think this is a better room than our
Ashcombe Court-house!"

"And how prettily it is decorated!" piped out Miss Piper. "How well
the roses are made! But you all have such taste at Hollingford."

"There's Mrs. Dempster," cried Miss Hornblower; "she said she and her
two daughters were asked to stay at Mr. Sheepshanks'. Mr. Preston
was to be there, too; but I suppose they could not all come at once.
Look! and there is young Roscoe, our new doctor. I declare it seems
as if all Ashcombe were here. Mr. Roscoe! Mr. Roscoe! come here and
let me introduce you to Miss Browning, the friend we are staying
with. We think very highly of our young doctor, I can assure you,
Miss Browning."

Mr. Roscoe bowed, and simpered at hearing his own praises. But Miss
Browning had no notion of having any doctor praised, who had come to
settle on the very verge of Mr. Gibson's practice, so she said to
Miss Hornblower,--

"You must be glad, I am sure, to have somebody you can call in, if
you are in any sudden hurry, or for things that are too trifling
to trouble Mr. Gibson about; and I should think Mr. Roscoe would
feel it a great advantage to profit, as he will naturally have the
opportunity of doing, by witnessing Mr. Gibson's skill!"

Probably Mr. Roscoe would have felt more aggrieved by this speech
than he really was, if his attention had not been called off just
then by the entrance of the very Mr. Gibson who was being spoken of.
Almost before Miss Browning had ended her severe and depreciatory
remarks, he had asked his friend Miss Hornblower,--

"Who is that lovely girl in pink, just come in?"

"Why, that's Cynthia Kirkpatrick!" said Miss Hornblower, taking up a
ponderous gold eyeglass to make sure of her fact. "How she has grown!
To be sure, it is two or three years since she left Ashcombe--she was
very pretty then--people did say Mr. Preston admired her very much;
but she was so young!"

"Can you introduce me?" asked the impatient young surgeon. "I should
like to ask her to dance."

When Miss Hornblower returned from her greeting to her former
acquaintance, Mrs. Gibson, and had accomplished the introduction
which Mr. Roscoe had requested, she began her little confidences to
Miss Browning.

"Well, to be sure! How condescending we are! I remember the time when
Mrs. Kirkpatrick wore old black silks, and was thankful and civil
as became her place as a schoolmistress, and as having to earn her
bread. And now she is in a satin; and she speaks to me as if she
just could recollect who I was, if she tried very hard! It isn't so
long ago since Mrs. Dempster came to consult me as to whether Mrs.
Kirkpatrick would be offended, if she sent her a new breadth for
her lilac silk-gown, in place of one that had been spoilt by Mrs.
Dempster's servant spilling the coffee over it the night before; and
she took it and was thankful, for all she's dressed in pearl-grey
satin now! And she would have been glad enough to marry Mr. Preston
in those days."

"I thought you said he admired her daughter," put in Miss Browning to
her irritated friend.

"Well! perhaps I did, and perhaps it was so; I'm sure I can't tell;
he was a great deal at the house. Miss Dixon keeps a school in the
same house now, and I'm sure she does it a great deal better."

"The earl and the countess are very fond of Mrs. Gibson," said Miss
Browning. "I know, for Lady Harriet told us when she came to drink
tea with us last autumn; and they desired Mr. Preston to be very
attentive to her when she lived at Ashcombe."

"For goodness' sake don't go and repeat what I've been saying
about Mr. Preston and Mrs. Kirkpatrick to her ladyship. One may be
mistaken, and you know I only said 'people talked about it.'"

Miss Hornblower was evidently alarmed lest her gossip should be
repeated to the Lady Harriet, who appeared to be on such an intimate
footing with her Hollingford friends. Nor did Miss Browning dissipate
the illusion. Lady Harriet had drunk tea with them, and might do it
again; and, at any rate, the little fright she had put her friend
into was not a bad return for that praise of Mr. Roscoe, which had
offended Miss Browning's loyalty to Mr. Gibson.

Meanwhile Miss Piper and Miss Phoebe, who had not the character of
_esprit-forts_ to maintain, talked of the dresses of the people
present, beginning by complimenting each other.

"What a lovely turban you have got on, Miss Piper, if I may be
allowed to say so: so becoming to your complexion!"

"Do you think so?" said Miss Piper, with ill-concealed gratification;
it was something to have a "complexion" at forty-five. "I got it
at Brown's, at Somerton, for this very ball. I thought I must have
something to set off my gown, which isn't quite so new as it once
was; and I have no handsome jewellery like you"--looking with
admiring eyes at a large miniature set round with pearls, which
served as a shield to Miss Phoebe's breast.

"It is handsome," that lady replied. "It is a likeness of my dear
mother; Dorothy has got my father on. The miniatures were both taken
at the same time; and just about then my uncle died and left us each
a legacy of fifty pounds, which we agreed to spend on the setting of
our miniatures. But because they are so valuable Dorothy always keeps
them locked up with the best silver, and hides the box somewhere; she
never will tell me where, because she says I've such weak nerves, and
that if a burglar, with a loaded pistol at my head, were to ask me
where we kept our plate and jewels, I should be sure to tell him; and
she says, for her part, she would never think of revealing under any
circumstances. (I'm sure I hope she won't be tried.) But that's the
reason I don't wear it often; it's only the second time I've had it
on; and I can't even get at it, and look at it, which I should like
to do. I shouldn't have had it on to-night, but that Dorothy gave
it out to me, saying it was but a proper compliment to pay to the
Duchess of Menteith, who is to be here in all her diamonds."

"Dear-ah-me! Is she really! Do you know I never saw a duchess
before." And Miss Piper drew herself up and craned her neck, as if
resolved to "behave herself properly," as she had been taught to
do at boarding-school thirty years before, in the presence of "her
grace." By-and-by she said to Miss Phoebe, with a sudden jerk out
of position,--"Look, look! that's our Mr. Cholmley, the magistrate"
(he was the great man of Coreham), "and that's Mrs. Cholmley in red
satin, and Mr. George and Mr. Harry from Oxford, I do declare; and
Miss Cholmley, and pretty Miss Sophy. I should like to go and speak
to them, but then it's so formidable crossing a room without a
gentleman. And there is Coxe the butcher and his wife! Why all
Coreham seems to be here! And how Mrs. Coxe can afford such a gown I
can't make out for one, for I know Coxe had some difficulty in paying
for the last sheep he bought of my brother."

Just at this moment the band, consisting of two violins, a harp, and
an occasional clarionet, having finished their tuning, and brought
themselves as nearly into accord as was possible, struck up a brisk
country-dance, and partners quickly took their places. Mrs. Gibson
was secretly a little annoyed at Cynthia's being one of those
to stand up in this early dance, the performers in which were
principally the punctual plebeians of Hollingford, who, when a ball
was fixed to begin at eight, had no notion of being later, and so
losing part of the amusement for which they had paid their money. She
imparted some of her feelings to Molly, sitting by her, longing to
dance, and beating time to the spirited music with one of her pretty
little feet.

"Your dear papa is always so very punctual! To-night it seems almost
a pity, for we really are here before there is any one come that we
know."

"Oh! I see so many people here that I know. There are Mr. and Mrs.
Smeaton, and that nice good-tempered daughter."

"Oh! booksellers and butchers if you will."

"Papa has found a great many friends to talk to."

"Patients, my dear--hardly friends. There are some nice-looking
people here," catching her eye on the Cholmleys; "but I daresay they
have driven over from the neighbourhood of Ashcombe or Coreham, and
have hardly calculated how soon they would get here. I wonder when
the Towers' party will come. Ah! there's Mr. Ashton, and Mr. Preston.
Come, the room is beginning to fill."

So it was, for this was to be a very good ball, people said; and a
large party from the Towers was coming, and a duchess in diamonds
among the number. Every great house in the district was expected to
be full of guests on these occasions; but at this early hour, the
townspeople had the floor almost entirely to themselves; the county
magnates came dropping in later; and chiefest among them all was the
lord-lieutenant from the Towers. But to-night they were unusually
late, and the aristocratic ozone being absent from the atmosphere,
there was a flatness about the dancing of all those who considered
themselves above the plebeian ranks of the tradespeople. They,
however, enjoyed themselves thoroughly, and sprang and bounded
till their eyes sparkled and their cheeks glowed with exercise and
excitement. Some of the more prudent parents, mindful of the next
day's duties, began to consider at what hour they ought to go home;
but with all there was an expressed or unexpressed curiosity to
see the duchess and her diamonds; for the Menteith diamonds were
famous in higher circles than that now assembled; and their fame
had trickled down to it through the medium of ladies'-maids and
housekeepers. Mr. Gibson had had to leave the ball-room for a time,
as he had anticipated, but he was to return to his wife as soon as
his duties were accomplished; and, in his absence, Mrs. Gibson kept
herself a little aloof from the Miss Brownings and those of her
acquaintance who would willingly have entered into conversation with
her, with the view of attaching herself to the skirts of the Towers'
party, when they should make their appearance. If Cynthia would not
be so very ready in engaging herself to every possible partner who
asked her to dance, there were sure to be young men staying at the
Towers who would be on the look-out for pretty girls: and who could
tell to what a dance might lead? Molly, too, though not so good a
dancer as Cynthia, and, from her timidity, less graceful and easy,
was becoming engaged pretty deeply; and, it must be confessed,
she was longing to dance every dance, no matter with whom. Even
she might not be available for the more aristocratic partners Mrs.
Gibson anticipated. She was feeling very much annoyed with the whole
proceedings of the evening when she was aware of some one standing by
her; and, turning a little to one side, she saw Mr. Preston keeping
guard, as it were, over the seats which Molly and Cynthia had just
quitted. He was looking so black that, if their eyes had not met,
Mrs. Gibson would have preferred not speaking to him; as it was, she
thought it unavoidable.

"The rooms are not well-lighted to-night, are they, Mr. Preston?"

"No," said he; "but who could light such dingy old paint as this,
loaded with evergreens, too, which always darken a room?"

"And the company, too! I always think that freshness and brilliancy
of dress go as far as anything to brighten up a room. Look what a set
of people are here: the greater part of the women are dressed in
dark silks, really only fit for a morning. The place will be quite
different, by-and-by, when the county families are in a little more
force."

Mr. Preston made no reply. He had put his glass in his eye,
apparently for the purpose of watching the dancers. If its exact
direction could have been ascertained, it would have been found
that he was looking intently and angrily at a flying figure in pink
muslin: many a one was gazing at Cynthia with intentness besides
himself, but no one in anger. Mrs. Gibson was not so fine an observer
as to read all this; but here was a gentlemanly and handsome young
man, to whom she could prattle, instead of either joining herself on
to objectionable people, or sitting all forlorn until the Towers'
party came. So she went on with her small remarks.

"You are not dancing, Mr. Preston!"

"No! The partner I had engaged has made some mistake. I am waiting to
have an explanation with her."

Mrs. Gibson was silent. An uncomfortable tide of recollections
appeared to come over her; she, like Mr. Preston, watched Cynthia;
the dance was ended, and she was walking round the room in easy
unconcern as to what might await her. Presently her partner, Mr.
Harry Cholmley, brought her back to her seat. She took that vacant
next to Mr. Preston, leaving the one by her mother for Molly's
occupation. The latter returned a moment afterwards to her place.
Cynthia seemed entirely unconscious of Mr. Preston's neighbourhood.
Mrs. Gibson leaned forwards, and said to her daughter,--

"Your last partner was a gentleman, my dear. You are improving in
your selection. I really was ashamed of you before, figuring away
with that attorney's clerk. Molly, do you know whom you have been
dancing with? I have found out he is the Coreham bookseller."

"That accounts for his being so well up in all the books I've been
wanting to hear about," said Molly, eagerly, but with a spice of
malice in her mind. "He really was very pleasant, mamma," she added;
"and he looks quite a gentleman, and dances beautifully!"

"Very well. But remember if you go on this way you will have to shake
hands over the counter to-morrow morning with some of your partners
of to-night," said Mrs. Gibson, coldly.

"But I really don't know how to refuse when people are introduced
to me and ask me, and I am longing to dance. You know to-night it
is a charity ball, and papa said everybody danced with everybody,"
said Molly, in a pleading tone of voice; for she could not quite
thoroughly enjoy herself if she was out of harmony with any one.
What reply Mrs. Gibson would have made to this speech cannot now
be ascertained; for, before she could answer, Mr. Preston stepped
a little forwards, and said, in a tone which he meant to be icily
indifferent, but which trembled with anger,--

"If Miss Gibson finds any difficulty in refusing a partner, she has
only to apply to Miss Kirkpatrick for instructions."

Cynthia lifted up her beautiful eyes, and, fixing them on Mr.
Preston's face, said, very quietly, as if only stating a matter of
fact,--

"You forget, I think, Mr. Preston: Miss Gibson implied that she
wished to dance with the person who asked her--that makes all the
difference. I can't instruct her how to act in that difficulty."

And to the rest of this little conversation, Cynthia appeared to lend
no ear; and she was almost directly claimed by her next partner. Mr.
Preston took the seat now left empty much to Molly's annoyance. At
first she feared lest he might be going to ask her to dance; but,
instead, he put out his hand for Cynthia's nosegay, which she had
left on rising, entrusted to Molly. It had suffered considerably from
the heat of the room, and was no longer full and fresh; not so much
so as Molly's, which had not, in the first instance, been pulled to
pieces in picking out the scarlet flowers which now adorned Molly's
hair, and which had since been cherished with more care. Enough,
however, remained of Cynthia's to show very distinctly that it was
not the one Mr. Preston had sent; and it was perhaps to convince
himself of this, that he rudely asked to examine it. But Molly,
faithful to what she imagined would be Cynthia's wish, refused to
allow him to touch it; she only held it a little nearer.

"Miss Kirkpatrick has not done me the honour of wearing the bouquet
I sent her, I see. She received it, I suppose, and my note?"

"Yes," said Molly, rather intimidated by the tone in which this was
said. "But we had already accepted these two nosegays."

Mrs. Gibson was just the person to come to the rescue with her
honeyed words on such an occasion as the present. She evidently was
rather afraid of Mr. Preston, and wished to keep at peace with him.

"Oh, yes, we were so sorry! Of course, I don't mean to say we could
be sorry for any one's kindness; but two such lovely nosegays had
been sent from Hamley Hall--you may see how beautiful from what Molly
holds in her hand--and they had come before yours, Mr. Preston."

"I should have felt honoured if you had accepted of mine, since
the young ladies were so well provided for. I was at some pains in
selecting the flowers at Green's; I think I may say it was rather
more recherchÄ than that of Miss Kirkpatrick's, which Miss Gibson
holds so tenderly and securely in her hand."

"Oh, because Cynthia would take out the most effective flowers to put
in my hair!" exclaimed Molly, eagerly.

"Did she?" said Mr. Preston, with a certain accent of pleasure in his
voice, as though he were glad she set so little store by the nosegay;
and he walked off to stand behind Cynthia in the quadrille that was
being danced; and Molly saw him making her reply to him--against her
will, Molly was sure. But, somehow, his face and manner implied power
over her. She looked grave, deaf, indifferent, indignant, defiant;
but, after a half-whispered speech to Cynthia, at the conclusion
of the dance, she evidently threw him an impatient consent to what
he was asking, for he walked off with a disagreeable smile of
satisfaction on his handsome face.

All this time the murmurs were spreading at the lateness of the party
from the Towers, and person after person came up to Mrs. Gibson as
if she were the accredited authority as to the earl and countess's
plans. In one sense this was flattering; but then the acknowledgment
of common ignorance and wonder reduced her to the level of the
inquirers. Mrs. Goodenough felt herself particularly aggrieved; she
had had her spectacles on for the last hour and a half, in order to
be ready for the sight the very first minute any one from the Towers
appeared at the door.

"I had a headache," she complained, "and I should have sent my money,
and never stirred out o' doors to-night; for I've seen a many of
these here balls, and my lord and my lady too, when they were better
worth looking at nor they are now; but every one was talking of the
duchess, and the duchess and her diamonds, and I thought I shouldn't
like to be behindhand, and never ha' seen neither the duchess nor
her diamonds; so I'm here, and coal and candle-light wasting away
at home, for I told Sally to sit up for me; and, above everything,
I cannot abide waste. I took it from my mother, who was such a one
against waste as you never see now-a-days. She was a manager, if
ever there was a one; and brought up nine children on less than
any one else could do, I'll be bound. Why! she wouldn't let us be
extravagant--not even in the matter of colds. Whenever any on us had
got a pretty bad cold, she took the opportunity and cut our hair; for
she said, said she, it was of no use having two colds when one would
do--and cutting of our hair was sure to give us a cold. But, for all
that, I wish the duchess would come."

"Ah! but fancy what it is to me," sighed out Mrs. Gibson; "so long as
I have been without seeing the dear family--and seeing so little of
them the other day when I was at the Towers (for the duchess would
have my opinion on Lady Alice's trousseau, and kept asking me so many
questions it took up all the time)--and Lady Harriet's last words
were a happy anticipation of our meeting to-night. It's nearly twelve
o'clock."

Every one of any pretensions to gentility was painfully affected by
the absence of the family from the Towers; the very fiddlers seemed
unwilling to begin playing a dance that might be interrupted by the
entrance of the great folks. Miss Phoebe Browning had apologized
for them--Miss Browning had blamed them with calm dignity; it was
only the butchers and bakers and candlestick-makers who rather
enjoyed the absence of restraint, and were happy and hilarious.

At last, there was a rumbling, and a rushing, and a whispering, and
the music stopped; so the dancers were obliged to do so too; and in
came Lord Cumnor in his state dress, with a fat, middle-aged woman
on his arm; she was dressed almost like a girl--in a sprigged muslin,
with natural flowers in her hair, but not a vestige of a jewel or a
diamond. Yet it must be the duchess; but what was a duchess without
diamonds?--and in a dress which farmer Hudson's daughter might have
worn! Was it the duchess? Could it be the duchess? The little crowd
of inquirers around Mrs. Gibson thickened, to hear her confirm their
disappointing surmise. After the duchess came Lady Cumnor, looking
like Lady Macbeth in black velvet--a cloud upon her brow, made more
conspicuous by the lines of age rapidly gathering on her handsome
face; and Lady Harriet, and other ladies, amongst whom there was one
dressed so like the duchess as to suggest the idea of a sister rather
than a daughter, as far as dress went. There was Lord Hollingford,
plain in face, awkward in person, gentlemanly in manner; and
half-a-dozen younger men, Lord Albert Monson, Captain James, and
others of their age and standing, who came in looking anything if not
critical. This long-expected party swept up to the seats reserved
for them at the head of the room, apparently regardless of the
interruption they caused; for the dancers stood aside, and almost
dispersed back to their seats, and when "Money-musk" struck up again,
not half the former set of people stood up to finish the dance.

Lady Harriet, who was rather different to Miss Piper, and no more
minded crossing the room alone than if the lookers-on were so many
cabbages, spied the Gibson party pretty quickly out, and came across
to them.

"Here we are at last. How d'ye do, dear? Why, little one" (to Molly),
"how nice you're looking! Aren't we shamefully late?"

"Oh! it's only just past twelve," said Mrs. Gibson; "and I daresay
you dined very late."

"It wasn't that; it was that ill-mannered woman, who went to her own
room after we came out from dinner, and she and Lady Alice stayed
there invisible, till we thought they were putting on some splendid
attire--as they ought to have done--and at half-past ten, when mamma
sent up to them to say the carriages were at the door, the duchess
sent down for some beef-tea, and at last appeared _ł l'enfant_ as
you see her. Mamma is so angry with her, and some of the others are
annoyed at not coming earlier, and one or two are giving themselves
airs about coming at all. Papa is the only one who is not affected by
it." Then turning to Molly Lady Harriet asked,--

"Have you been dancing much, Miss Gibson?"

"Yes; not every dance, but nearly all."

It was a simple question enough; but Lady Harriet's speaking at all
to Molly had become to Mrs. Gibson almost like shaking a red rag at
a bull; it was the one thing sure to put her out of temper. But she
would not have shown this to Lady Harriet for the world; only she
contrived to baffle any endeavours at further conversation between
the two, by placing herself betwixt Lady Harriet and Molly, whom the
former asked to sit down in the absent Cynthia's room.

"I won't go back to those people, I am so mad with them; and,
besides, I hardly saw you the other day, and I must have some gossip
with you." So she sat down by Mrs. Gibson, and as Mrs. Goodenough
afterwards expressed it, "looked like anybody else." Mrs. Goodenough
said this to excuse herself for a little misadventure she fell into.
She had taken a deliberate survey of the grandees at the upper end of
the room, spectacles on nose, and had inquired, in no very measured
voice, who everybody was, from Mr. Sheepshanks, my lord's agent, and
her very good neighbour, who in vain tried to check her loud ardour
for information by replying to her in whispers. But she was rather
deaf as well as blind, so his low tones only brought upon him fresh
inquiries. Now, satisfied as far as she could be, and on her way
to departure, and the extinguishing of fire and candle-light, she
stopped opposite to Mrs. Gibson, and thus addressed her by way of
renewal of their former subject of conversation:--

"Such a shabby thing for a duchess I never saw; not a bit of a
diamond near her! They're none of 'em worth looking at except the
countess, and she's always a personable woman, and not so lusty
as she was. But they're not worth waiting up for till this time o'
night."

There was a moment's pause. Then Lady Harriet put her hand out, and
said,--

"You don't remember me, but I know you from having seen you at the
Towers. Lady Cumnor is a good deal thinner than she was, but we hope
her health is better for it."

"It's Lady Harriet," said Mrs. Gibson to Mrs. Goodenough, in
reproachful dismay.

"Deary me, your ladyship! I hope I've given no offence! But, you
see--that is to say, your ladyship sees, that it's late hours for
such folks as me, and I only stayed out of my bed to see the duchess,
and I thought she'd come in diamonds and a coronet; and it puts one
out at my age, to be disappointed in the only chance I'm like to have
of so fine a sight."

"I'm put out too," said Lady Harriet. "I wanted to have come early,
and here we are as late as this. I'm so cross and ill-tempered, I
should be glad to hide myself in bed as soon as you will do."

She said this so sweetly that Mrs. Goodenough relaxed into a smile,
and her crabbedness into a compliment.

"I don't believe as ever your ladyship can be cross and ill-tempered
with that pretty face. I'm an old woman, so you must let me say so."
Lady Harriet stood up, and made a low curtsey. Then holding out her
hand, she said,--

"I won't keep you up any longer; but I'll promise one thing in return
for your pretty speech: if ever I am a duchess, I'll come and show
myself to you in all my robes and gewgaws. Good night, madam!"

"There! I knew how it would be!" said she, not resuming her seat.
"And on the eve of a county election too."

"Oh! you must not take old Mrs. Goodenough as a specimen, dear Lady
Harriet. She is always a grumbler! I am sure no one else would
complain of your all being as late as you liked," said Mrs. Gibson.

"What do you say, Molly?" said Lady Harriet, suddenly turning her
eyes on Molly's face. "Don't you think we've lost some of our
popularity,--which at this time means votes--by coming so late. Come,
answer me! you used to be a famous little truth-teller."

"I don't know about popularity or votes," said Molly, rather
unwillingly. "But I think many people were sorry you did not come
sooner; and isn't that rather a proof of popularity?" she added.

"That's a very neat and diplomatic answer," said Lady Harriet,
smiling, and tapping Molly's cheek with her fan.

"Molly knows nothing about it," said Mrs. Gibson, a little off
her guard. "It would be very impertinent if she or any one else
questioned Lady Cumnor's perfect right to come when she chose."

"Well, all I know is, I must go back to mamma now; but I shall make
another raid into these regions by-and-by, and you must keep a place
for me. Ah! there are--Miss Brownings; you see I don't forget my
lesson, Miss Gibson."

"Molly, I cannot have you speaking so to Lady Harriet," said Mrs.
Gibson, as soon as she was left alone with her stepdaughter. "You
would never have known her at all if it had not been for me, and
don't be always putting yourself into our conversation."

"But I must speak if she asks me questions," pleaded Molly.

"Well! if you must, you must, I acknowledge. I'm candid about that at
any rate. But there's no need for you to set up to have an opinion at
your age."

"I don't know how to help it," said Molly.

"She's such a whimsical person; look there, if she's not talking to
Miss Phoebe; and Miss Phoebe is so weak she'll be easily led away
into fancying she is hand and glove with Lady Harriet. If there is
one thing I hate more than another, it is the trying to make out an
intimacy with great people."

Molly felt innocent enough, so she offered no justification of
herself, and made no reply. Indeed she was more occupied in watching
Cynthia. She could not understand the change that seemed to have come
over her. She was dancing, it was true, with the same lightness and
grace as before, but the smooth bounding motion, as of a feather
blown onwards by the wind, was gone. She was conversing with her
partner, but without the soft animation that usually shone out upon
her countenance. And when she was brought back to her seat Molly
noticed her changed colour, and her dreamily abstracted eyes.

"What is the matter, Cynthia?" asked she, in a very low voice.

"Nothing," said Cynthia, suddenly looking up, and in an accent of
what, in her, was sharpness. "Why should there be?"

"I don't know; but you look different to what you did--tired or
something."

"There's nothing the matter, or, if there is, don't talk about it.
It's all your fancy."

This was a rather contradictory speech, to be interpreted by
intuition rather than by logic. Molly understood that Cynthia wished
for quietness and silence. But what was her surprise, after the
speeches that had passed before, and the implication of Cynthia's
whole manner to Mr. Preston, to see him come up to her, and, without
a word, offer his arm and lead her away to dance. It appeared to
strike Mrs. Gibson as something remarkable; for, forgetting her late
passage at arms with Molly, she asked, wonderingly, as if almost
distrusting the evidence of her senses,--

"Is Cynthia going to dance with Mr. Preston?"

Molly had scarcely time to answer before she herself was led off by
her partner. She could hardly attend to him or to the figures of the
quadrille for watching for Cynthia among the moving forms.

Once she caught a glimpse of her standing still--downcast--listening
to Mr. Preston's eager speech. Again she was walking languidly among
the dancers, almost as if she took no notice of those around her.
When she and Molly joined each other again, the shade on Cynthia's
face had deepened to gloom. But, at the same time, if a physiognomist
had studied her expression, he would have read in it defiance and
anger, and perhaps also a little perplexity. While this quadrille had
been going on, Lady Harriet had been speaking to her brother.

"Hollingford!" she said, laying her hand on his arm, and drawing him
a little apart from the well-born crowd amid which he stood, silent
and abstracted, "you don't know how these good people here have been
hurt and disappointed with our being so late, and with the duchess's
ridiculous simplicity of dress."

"Why should they mind it?" asked he, taking advantage of her being
out of breath with eagerness.

"Oh, don't be so wise and stupid; don't you see, we're a show and a
spectacle--it's like having a pantomime with harlequin and columbine
in plain clothes."

"I don't understand how--" he began.

"Then take it upon trust. They really are a little disappointed,
whether they are logical or not in being so, and we must try and make
it up to them; for one thing, because I can't bear our vassals to
look dissatisfied and disloyal, and then there's the election in
June."

"I really would as soon be out of the House as in it."

"Nonsense; it would grieve papa beyond measure--but there's no
time to talk about that now. You must go and dance with some of
the townspeople, and I'll ask Sheepshanks to introduce me to a
respectable young farmer. Can't you get Captain James to make himself
useful? There he goes with Lady Alice! If I don't get him introduced
to the ugliest tailor's daughter I can find for the next dance!" She
put her arm in her brother's as she spoke, as if to lead him to some
partner. He resisted, however--resisted piteously.

"Pray don't, Harriet. You know I can't dance. I hate it; I always
did. I don't know how to get through a quadrille."

"It's a country dance!" said she, resolutely.

"It's all the same. And what shall I say to my partner? I haven't
a notion: I shall have no subject in common. Speak of being
disappointed, they'll be ten times more disappointed when they find I
can neither dance nor talk!"

"I'll be merciful; don't be so cowardly. In their eyes a lord may
dance like a bear--as some lords not very far from me are--if he
likes, and they'll take it for grace. And you shall begin with Molly
Gibson, your friend the doctor's daughter. She's a good, simple,
intelligent little girl, which you'll think a great deal more of, I
suppose, than of the frivolous fact of her being very pretty. Clare!
will you allow me to introduce my brother to Miss Gibson? he hopes to
engage her for this dance. Lord Hollingford, Miss Gibson!"

Poor Lord Hollingford! there was nothing for it but for him to follow
his sister's very explicit lead, and Molly and he walked off to their
places, each heartily wishing their dance together well over. Lady
Harriet flew off to Mr. Sheepshanks to secure her respectable young
farmer, and Mrs. Gibson remained alone, wishing that Lady Cumnor
would send one of her attendant gentlemen for her. It would be so
much more agreeable to be sitting even at the fag-end of nobility
than here on a bench with everybody; hoping that everybody would see
Molly dancing away with a lord, yet vexed that the chance had so
befallen that Molly instead of Cynthia was the young lady singled
out; wondering if simplicity of dress was now become the highest
fashion, and pondering on the possibility of cleverly inducing
Lady Harriet to introduce Lord Albert Monson to her own beautiful
daughter, Cynthia.

Molly found Lord Hollingford, the wise and learned Lord Hollingford,
strangely stupid in understanding the mystery of "Cross hands and
back again, down the middle and up again." He was constantly getting
hold of the wrong hands, and as constantly stopping when he had
returned to his place, quite unaware that the duties of society and
the laws of the dance required that he should go on capering till
he had arrived at the bottom of the room. He perceived that he had
performed his part very badly, and apologized to Molly when once they
had arrived at that haven of comparative peace; and he expressed his
regret so simply and heartily that she felt at her ease with him at
once, especially when he confided to her his reluctance at having to
dance at all, and his only doing it under his sister's compulsion.
To Molly he was an elderly widower, almost as old as her father,
and by-and-by they got into very pleasant conversation. She learnt
from him that Roger Hamley had just been publishing a paper in some
scientific periodical, which had excited considerable attention,
as it was intended to confute some theory of a great French
physiologist, and Roger's article proved the writer to be possessed
of a most unusual amount of knowledge on the subject. This piece
of news was of great interest to Molly; and, in her questions, she
herself evinced so much intelligence, and a mind so well prepared for
the reception of information, that Lord Hollingford at any rate would
have felt his quest of popularity a very easy affair indeed, if he
might have gone on talking quietly to Molly during the rest of the
evening. When he took her back to her place, he found Mr. Gibson
there, and fell into talk with him, until Lady Harriet once more came
to stir him up to his duties. Before very long, however, he returned
to Mr. Gibson's side, and began telling him of this paper of Roger
Hamley's, of which Mr. Gibson had not yet heard. In the midst
of their conversation, as they stood close by Mrs. Gibson, Lord
Hollingford saw Molly in the distance, and interrupted himself to
say, "What a charming little lady that daughter of yours is! Most
girls of her age are so difficult to talk to; but she is intelligent
and full of interest in all sorts of sensible things; well read,
too--she was up in _Le RĆgne Animal_--and very pretty!"

Mr. Gibson bowed, much pleased at such a compliment from such a man,
were he lord or not. It is very likely that if Molly had been a
stupid listener, Lord Hollingford would not have discovered her
beauty; or the converse might be asserted--if she had not been young
and pretty, he would not have exerted himself to talk on scientific
subjects in a manner which she could understand. But in whatever way
Molly had won his approbation and admiration, there was no doubt that
she had earned it somehow. And, when she next returned to her place,
Mrs. Gibson greeted her with soft words and a gracious smile; for
it does not require much reasoning power to discover, that if it
is a very fine thing to be mother-in-law to a very magnificent
three-tailed bashaw, it presupposes that the wife who makes the
connection between the two parties is in harmony with her mother. And
so far had Mrs. Gibson's thoughts wandered into futurity. She only
wished that the happy chance had fallen to Cynthia's instead of to
Molly's lot. But Molly was a docile, sweet creature, very pretty,
and remarkably intelligent, as my lord had said. It was a pity that
Cynthia preferred making millinery to reading; but perhaps that could
be rectified. And there was Lord Cumnor coming to speak to her, and
Lady Cumnor nodding to her, and indicating a place by her side.

It was not an unsatisfactory ball upon the whole to Mrs. Gibson,
although she paid the usual penalty for sitting up beyond her
ordinary hour in perpetual glare and movement. The next morning
she awoke irritable and fatigued; and a little of the same feeling
oppressed both Cynthia and Molly. The former was lounging in the
window-seat, holding a three-days'-old newspaper in her hand, which
she was making a pretence of reading, when she was startled by her
mother's saying,--

"Cynthia! can't you take up a book and improve yourself? I am sure
your conversation will never be worth listening to, unless you read
something better than newspapers. Why don't you keep up your French?
There was some French book that Molly was reading--_Le RĆgne Animal_,
I think."

"No! I never read it!" said Molly, blushing. "Mr. Roger Hamley
sometimes read pieces out of it when I was first at the Hall, and
told me what it was about."

"Oh! well. Then I suppose I was mistaken. But it comes to all the
same thing. Cynthia, you really must learn to settle yourself to some
improving reading every morning."

Rather to Molly's surprise, Cynthia did not reply a word; but
dutifully went and brought down from among her Boulogne school-books,
_Le SiĆcle de Louis XIV_. But after a while, Molly saw that this
"improving reading" was just as much a mere excuse for Cynthia's
thinking her own thoughts as the newspaper had been.




CHAPTER XXVII.

FATHER AND SONS.


[Illustration (untitled)]

Things were not going on any better at Hamley Hall. Nothing had
occurred to change the state of dissatisfied feeling into which the
Squire and his eldest son had respectively fallen; and the long
continuance merely of dissatisfaction is sure of itself to deepen
the feeling. Roger did all in his power to bring the father and son
together; but sometimes wondered if it would not have been better to
leave them alone; for they were falling into the habit of each making
him their confidant, and so defining emotions and opinions which
would have had less distinctness if they had been unexpressed. There
was little enough relief in the daily life at the Hall to help them
all to shake off the gloom; and it even told on the health of both
the Squire and Osborne. The Squire became thinner, his skin as well
as his clothes began to hang loose about him, and the freshness
of his colour turned to red streaks, till his cheeks looked like
Eardiston pippins, instead of resembling "a Katherine pear on the
side that's next the sun." Roger thought that his father sate indoors
and smoked in his study more than was good for him, but it had
become difficult to get him far afield; he was too much afraid of
coming across some sign of the discontinued drainage works, or being
irritated afresh by the sight of his depreciated timber. Osborne was
wrapt up in the idea of arranging his poems for the press, and so
working out his wish for independence. What with daily writing to
his wife--taking his letters himself to a distant post-office, and
receiving hers there--touching up his sonnets, &c., with fastidious
care--and occasionally giving himself the pleasure of a visit to the
Gibsons, and enjoying the society of the two pleasant girls there,
he found little time for being with his father. Indeed, Osborne was
too self-indulgent or "sensitive," as he termed it, to bear well
with the Squire's gloomy fits, or too frequent querulousness. The
consciousness of his secret, too, made Osborne uncomfortable in his
father's presence. It was very well for all parties that Roger was
not "sensitive," for, if he had been, there were times when it would
have been hard to bear little spurts of domestic tyranny, by which
his father strove to assert his power over both his sons. One of
these occurred very soon after the night of the Hollingford
charity-ball.

Roger had induced his father to come out with him; and the Squire
had, on his son's suggestion, taken with him his long unused spud.
The two had wandered far afield; perhaps the elder man had found the
unwonted length of exercise too much for him; for, as he approached
the house, on his return, he became what nurses call in children
"fractious," and ready to turn on his companion for every remark he
made. Roger understood the case by instinct, as it were, and bore it
all with his usual sweetness of temper. They entered the house by
the front door; it lay straight on their line of march. On the old
cracked yellow-marble slab, there lay a card with Lord Hollingford's
name on it, which Robinson, evidently on the watch for their return,
hastened out of his pantry to deliver to Roger.

"His lordship was very sorry not to see you, Mr. Roger, and his
lordship left a note for you. Mr. Osborne took it, I think, when
he passed through. I asked his lordship if he would like to see Mr.
Osborne, who was indoors, as I thought. But his lordship said he was
pressed for time, and told me to make his excuses."

"Didn't he ask for me?" growled the Squire.

"No, sir; I can't say as his lordship did. He would never have
thought of Mr. Osborne, sir, if I hadn't named him. It was Mr. Roger
he seemed so keen after."

"Very odd," said the Squire. Roger said nothing, although he
naturally felt some curiosity. He went into the drawing-room, not
quite aware that his father was following him. Osborne sate at a
table near the fire, pen in hand, looking over one of his poems, and
dotting the _i_'s, crossing the _t_'s, and now and then pausing over
the alteration of a word.

"Oh, Roger!" he said, as his brother came in, "here's been Lord
Hollingford wanting to see you."

"I know," replied Roger.

"And he's left a note for you. Robinson tried to persuade him it was
for my father, so he's added a 'junior' (Roger Hamley, Esq., junior)
in pencil." The Squire was in the room by this time, and what he had
overheard rubbed him up still more the wrong way. Roger took his
unopened note and read it.

"What does he say?" asked the Squire.

Roger handed him the note. It contained an invitation to dinner to
meet M. Geoffroi St. H----, whose views on certain subjects Roger had
been advocating in the article Lord Hollingford had spoken about to
Molly, when he danced with her at the Hollingford ball. M. Geoffroi
St. H---- was in England now, and was expected to pay a visit at
the Towers in the course of the following week. He had expressed a
wish to meet the author of the paper which had already attracted the
attention of the French comparative anatomists; and Lord Hollingford
added a few words as to his own desire to make the acquaintance of a
neighbour whose tastes were so similar to his own; and then followed
a civil message from Lord and Lady Cumnor.

Lord Hollingford's hand was cramped and rather illegible. The squire
could not read it all at once, and was enough put out to decline any
assistance in deciphering it. At last he made it out.

"So my lord lieutenant is taking some notice of the Hamleys at last.
The election is coming on, is it? But I can tell him we're not to be
got so easily. I suppose this trap is set for you, Osborne? What's
this you've been writing that the French mounseer is so taken with?"

"It is not me, sir!" said Osborne. "Both note and call are for
Roger."

"I don't understand it," said the Squire. "These Whig fellows have
never done their duty by me; not that I want it of them. The Duke
of Debenham used to pay the Hamleys a respect due to 'em--the
oldest landowners in the county--but since he died, and this
shabby Whig lord has succeeded him, I've never dined at the lord
lieutenant's--no, not once."

"But I think, sir, I've heard you say Lord Cumnor used to invite
you,--only you did not choose to go," said Roger.

"Yes. What d'ye mean by that? Do you suppose I was going to desert
the principles of my family, and curry favour with the Whigs? No!
leave that to them. They can ask the heir of the Hamleys fast enough
when a county election is coming on."

"I tell you, sir," said Osborne, in the irritable tone he sometimes
used when his father was particularly unreasonable, "it is not me
Lord Hollingford is inviting; it is Roger. Roger is making himself
known for what he is, a first-rate fellow," continued Osborne--a
sting of self-reproach mingling with his generous pride in his
brother--"and he's getting himself a name; he's been writing
about these new French theories and discoveries, and this foreign
_savant_ very naturally wants to make his acquaintance, and so Lord
Hollingford asks him to dine. It's as clear as can be," lowering his
tone, and addressing himself to Roger; "it has nothing to do with
politics, if my father would but see it."

Of course the Squire heard this little aside with the unlucky
uncertainty of hearing which is a characteristic of the beginning
of deafness; and its effect on him was perceptible in the increased
acrimony of his next speech.

"You young men think you know everything. I tell you it's a palpable
Whig trick. And what business has Roger--if it is Roger the man
wants--to go currying favour with the French? In my day we were
content to hate 'em and to lick 'em. But it's just like your conceit,
Osborne, setting yourself up to say it's your younger brother they're
asking, and not you; I tell you it's you. They think the eldest son
was sure to be called after his father, Roger--Roger Hamley, junior.
It's as plain as a pike-staff. They know they can't catch me with
chaff, but they've got up this French dodge. What business had you to
go writing about the French, Roger? I should have thought you were
too sensible to take any notice of their fancies and theories; but if
it is you they've asked, I'll not have you going and meeting these
foreigners at a Whig house. They ought to have asked Osborne. He's
the representative of the Hamleys, if I'm not; and they can't get me,
let 'em try ever so. Besides, Osborne has got a bit of the mounseer
about him, which he caught with being so fond of going off to the
Continent, instead of coming back to his good old English home."

He went on repeating much of what he had said before, till he
left the room. Osborne had kept on replying to his unreasonable
grumblings, which had only added to his anger; and as soon as the
Squire was fairly gone, Osborne turned to Roger, and said,--

"Of course you'll go, Roger? ten to one he'll be in another mind
to-morrow."

"No," said Roger, bluntly enough--for he was extremely disappointed;
"I won't run the chance of vexing him. I shall refuse."

"Don't be such a fool!" exclaimed Osborne. "Really, my father is too
unreasonable. You heard how he kept contradicting himself; and such a
man as you to be kept under like a child by--"

"Don't let us talk any more about it, Osborne," said Roger, writing
away fast. When the note was written, and sent off, he came and put
his hand caressingly on Osborne's shoulder, as he sate pretending
to read, but in reality vexed with both his father and his brother,
though on very different grounds.

"How go the poems, old fellow? I hope they're nearly ready to bring
out."

"No, they're not; and if it weren't for the money, I shouldn't care
if they were never published. What's the use of fame, if one mayn't
reap the fruits of it?"

"Come, now, we'll have no more of that; let's talk about the money.
I shall be going up for my Fellowship examination next week, and then
we'll have a purse in common, for they'll never think of not giving
me a Fellowship now I'm senior wrangler. I'm short enough myself at
present, and I don't like to bother my father; but when I'm Fellow,
you shall take me down to Winchester, and introduce me to the little
wife."

"It will be a month next Monday since I left her," said Osborne,
laying down his papers and gazing into the fire, as if by so doing he
could call up her image. "In her letter this morning she bids me give
you such a pretty message. It won't bear translating into English;
you must read it for yourself," continued he, pointing out a line or
two in a letter he drew from his pocket.

Roger suspected that one or two of the words were wrongly spelt;
but their purport was so gentle and loving, and had such a touch of
simple, respectful gratitude in them, that he could not help being
drawn afresh to the little unseen sister-in-law, whose acquaintance
Osborne had made by helping her to look for some missing article of
the children's, whom she was taking for their daily walk in Hyde
Park. For Mrs. Osborne Hamley had been nothing more than a French
_bonne_, very pretty, very graceful, and very much tyrannized over
by the rough little boys and girls she had in charge. She was a
little orphan girl, who had charmed the heads of a travelling English
family, as she had brought madame some articles of lingerie at an
hotel; and she had been hastily engaged by them as _bonne_ to their
children, partly as a pet and plaything herself, partly because it
would be so good for the children to learn French from a native
(of Alsace!). By-and-by her mistress ceased to take any particular
notice of AimÄe in the bustle of London and London gaiety; but though
feeling more and more forlorn in a strange land every day, the French
girl strove hard to do her duty. One touch of kindness, however, was
enough to set the fountain gushing; and she and Osborne naturally
fell into an ideal state of love, to be rudely disturbed by the
indignation of the mother, when accident discovered to her the
attachment existing between her children's _bonne_ and a young man
of an entirely different class. AimÄe answered truly to all her
mistress's questions; but no worldly wisdom, nor any lesson to be
learnt from another's experience, could in the least disturb her
entire faith in her lover. Perhaps Mrs. Townshend did no more than
her duty in immediately sending AimÄe back to Metz, where she had
first met with her, and where such relations as remained to the girl
might be supposed to be residing. But, altogether, she knew so little
of the kind of people or life to which she was consigning her deposed
protÄgÄe that Osborne, after listening with impatient indignation to
the lecture which Mrs. Townshend gave him when he insisted on seeing
her in order to learn what had become of his love, that the young man
set off straight for Metz in hot haste, and did not let the grass
grow under his feet until he had made AimÄe his wife. All this had
occurred the previous autumn, and Roger did not know of the step his
brother had taken until it was irrevocable. Then came the mother's
death, which, besides the simplicity of its own overwhelming sorrow,
brought with it the loss of the kind, tender mediatrix, who could
always soften and turn his father's heart. It is doubtful, however,
if even she could have succeeded in this, for the Squire looked high,
and over high, for the wife of his heir; he detested all foreigners,
and overmore held all Roman Catholics in dread and abomination
something akin to our ancestors' hatred of witchcraft. All these
prejudices were strengthened by his grief. Argument would always have
glanced harmless away off his shield of utter unreason; but a loving
impulse, in a happy moment, might have softened his heart to what he
most detested in the former days. But the happy moments came not now,
and the loving impulses were trodden down by the bitterness of his
frequent remorse, not less than by his growing irritability; so AimÄe
lived solitary in the little cottage near Winchester in which Osborne
had installed her when she first came to England as his wife, and
in the dainty furnishing of which he had run himself so deeply into
debt. For Osborne consulted his own fastidious taste in his purchases
rather than her simple childlike wishes and wants, and looked upon
the little Frenchwoman rather as the future mistress of Hamley Hall
than as the wife of a man who was wholly dependent on others at
present. He had chosen a southern county as being far removed from
those midland shires where the name of Hamley of Hamley was well and
widely known; for he did not wish his wife to assume, if only for a
time, a name which was not justly and legally her own. In all these
arrangements he had willingly striven to do his full duty by her; and
she repaid him with passionate devotion and admiring reverence. If
his vanity had met with a check, or his worthy desires for college
honours had been disappointed, he knew where to go for a comforter;
one who poured out praise till her words were choked in her throat by
the rapidity of her thoughts, and who poured out the small vials of
her indignation on every one who did not acknowledge and bow down to
her husband's merits. If she ever wished to go to the chëteau--that
was his home--and to be introduced to his family, AimÄe never hinted
a word of it to him. Only she did yearn, and she did plead, for a
little more of her husband's company; and the good reasons which had
convinced her of the necessity of his being so much away when he was
present to urge them, failed in their efficacy when she tried to
reproduce them to herself in his absence.

The afternoon of the day on which Lord Hollingford called Roger
was going upstairs, three steps at a time, when, at a turn on the
landing, he encountered his father. It was the first time he had seen
him since their conversation about the Towers' invitation to dinner.
The Squire stopped his son by standing right in the middle of the
passage.

"Thou'rt going to meet the mounseer, my lad?" said he, half as
affirmation, half as question.

"No, sir; I sent off James almost immediately with a note declining
it. I don't care about it--that's to say, not to signify."

"Why did you take me up so sharp, Roger?" said his father pettishly.
"You all take me up so hastily now-a-days. I think it's hard when a
man mustn't be allowed a bit of crossness when he's tired and heavy
at heart--that I do."

"But, father, I should never like to go to a house where they had
slighted you."

"Nay, nay, lad," said the Squire, brightening up a little; "I think
I slighted them. They asked me to dinner, after my lord was made
lieutenant, time after time, but I never would go near 'em. I call
that my slighting them."

And no more was said at the time; but the next day the Squire again
stopped Roger.

"I've been making Jem try on his livery-coat that he hasn't worn this
three or four years,--he's got too stout for it now."

"Well, he needn't wear it, need he? and Morgan's lad will be glad
enough of it,--he's sadly in want of clothes."

"Ay, ay; but who's to go with you when you call at the Towers? It's
but polite to call after Lord What's-his-name has taken the trouble
to come here; and I shouldn't like you to go without a groom."

"My dear father! I shouldn't know what to do with a man riding at my
back. I can find my way to the stable-yard for myself, or there'll be
some man about to take my horse. Don't trouble yourself about that."

"Well, you're not Osborne, to be sure. Perhaps it won't strike 'em
as strange for you. But you must look up, and hold your own, and
remember you're one of the Hamleys, who've been on the same land for
hundreds of years, while they're but trumpery Whig folk who only came
into the county in Queen Anne's time."




CHAPTER XXVIII.

RIVALRY.


For some days after the ball Cynthia seemed languid, and was very
silent. Molly, who had promised herself fully as much enjoyment in
talking over the past gaiety with Cynthia as in the evening itself,
was disappointed when she found that all conversation on the subject
was rather evaded than encouraged. Mrs. Gibson, it is true, was ready
to go over the ground as many times as any one liked; but her words
were always like ready-made clothes, and never fitted individual
thoughts. Anybody might have used them, and, with a change of proper
names, they might have served to describe any ball. She repeatedly
used the same language in speaking about it, till Molly knew the
sentences and their sequence even to irritation.

"Ah! Mr. Osborne, you should have been there! I said to myself many a
time how you really should have been there--you and your brother, of
course."

"I thought of you very often during the evening!"

"Did you? Now that I call very kind of you. Cynthia, darling! Do you
hear what Mr. Osborne Hamley was saying?" as Cynthia came into the
room just then. "He thought of us all on the evening of the ball."

"He did better than merely remember us then," said Cynthia, with her
soft slow smile. "We owe him thanks for those beautiful flowers,
mamma."

"Oh!" said Osborne, "you must not thank me exclusively. I believe it
was my thought, but Roger took all the trouble of it."

"I consider the thought as everything," said Mrs. Gibson. "Thought is
spiritual, while action is merely material."

This fine sentence took the speaker herself by surprise; and in such
conversation as was then going on, it is not necessary to accurately
define the meaning of everything that is said.

"I'm afraid the flowers were too late to be of much use, though,"
continued Osborne. "I met Preston the next morning, and of course we
talked about the ball. I was sorry to find he had been beforehand
with us."

"He only sent one nosegay, and that was for Cynthia," said Molly,
looking up from her work. "And it did not come till after we had
received the flowers from Hamley." Molly caught a sight of Cynthia's
face before she bent down again to her sewing. It was scarlet in
colour, and there was a flash of anger in her eyes. Both she and her
mother hastened to speak as soon as Molly had finished, but Cynthia's
voice was choked with passion, and Mrs. Gibson had the word.

"Mr. Preston's bouquet was just one of those formal affairs any one
can buy at a nursery-garden, which always strike me as having no
sentiment in them. I would far rather have two or three lilies of the
valley gathered for me by a person I like, than the most expensive
bouquet that could be bought!"

"Mr. Preston had no business to speak as if he had forestalled you,"
said Cynthia. "It came just as we were ready to go, and I put it into
the fire directly."

"Cynthia, my dear love!" said Mrs. Gibson (who had never heard of the
fate of the flowers until now), "what an idea of yourself you will
give to Mr. Osborne Hamley; but, to be sure, I can quite understand
it. You inherit my feeling--my prejudice--sentimental I grant,
against bought flowers."

Cynthia was silent for a moment; then she said, "I used some of
your flowers, Mr. Hamley, to dress Molly's hair. It was a great
temptation, for the colour so exactly matched her coral ornaments;
but I believe she thought it treacherous to disturb the arrangement,
so I ought to take all the blame on myself."

"The arrangement was my brother's, as I told you; but I am sure he
would have preferred seeing them in Miss Gibson's hair rather than
in the blazing fire. Mr. Preston comes far the worst off." Osborne
was rather amused at the whole affair, and would have liked to probe
Cynthia's motives a little farther. He did not hear Molly saying in
as soft a voice as if she were talking to herself, "I wore mine just
as they were sent," for Mrs. Gibson came in with a total change of
subject.

"Speaking of lilies of the valley, is it true that they grow wild
in Hurst Wood? It is not the season for them to be in flower yet;
but when it is, I think we must take a walk there--with our luncheon
in a basket--a little picnic in fact. You'll join us, won't you?"
turning to Osborne. "I think it's a charming plan! You could ride to
Hollingford and put up your horse here, and we could have a long day
in the woods and all come home to dinner--dinner with a basket of
lilies in the middle of the table!"

"I should like it very much," said Osborne; "but I may not be at
home. Roger is more likely to be here, I believe, at that time--a
month hence." He was thinking of the visit to London to sell
his poems, and the run down to Winchester which he anticipated
afterwards--the end of May had been the period fixed for this
pleasure for some time, not merely in his own mind, but in writing to
his wife.

"Oh, but you must be with us! We must wait for Mr. Osborne Hamley,
must not we, Cynthia?"

"I'm afraid the lilies won't wait," replied Cynthia.

"Well, then, we must put it off till dog-rose and honey-suckle time.
You will be at home then, won't you? or does the London season
present too many attractions?"

"I don't exactly know when dog-roses are in flower!"

"Not know, and you a poet? Don't you remember the lines--

   It was the time of roses,
   We plucked them as we passed?"

"Yes; but that doesn't specify the time of year that is the time
of roses; and I believe my movements are guided more by the lunar
calendar than the floral. You had better take my brother for your
companion; he is practical in his love of flowers, I am only
theoretical."

"Does that fine word 'theoretical' imply that you are ignorant?"
asked Cynthia.

"Of course we shall be happy to see your brother; but why can't we
have you too? I confess to a little timidity in the presence of one
so deep and learned as your brother is from all accounts. Give me a
little charming ignorance, if we must call it by that hard word."

Osborne bowed. It was very pleasant to him to be petted and
flattered, even though he knew all the time that it was only
flattery. It was an agreeable contrast to the home that was so dismal
to him, to come to this house, where the society of two agreeable
girls, and the soothing syrup of their mother's speeches, awaited
him whenever he liked to come. To say nothing of the difference that
struck upon his senses, poetical though he might esteem himself, of a
sitting-room full of flowers, and tokens of women's presence, where
all the chairs were easy, and all the tables well covered with pretty
things, to the great drawing-room at home, where the draperies were
threadbare, and the seats uncomfortable, and no sign of feminine
presence ever now lent a grace to the stiff arrangement of the
furniture. Then the meals, light and well-cooked, suited his taste
and delicate appetite so much better than the rich and heavy viands
prepared by the servants at the Hall. Osborne was becoming a little
afraid of falling into the habit of paying too frequent visits to
the Gibsons (and that, not because he feared the consequences of
his intercourse with the two young ladies; for he never thought of
them excepting as friends;--the fact of his marriage was constantly
present to his mind, and AimÄe too securely enthroned in his heart,
for him to remember that he might be looked upon by others in the
light of a possible husband); but the reflection forced itself
upon him occasionally, whether he was not trespassing too often on
hospitality which he had at present no means of returning.

But Mrs. Gibson, in her ignorance of the true state of affairs, was
secretly exultant in the attraction which made him come so often
and lounge away the hours in her house and garden. She had no doubt
that it was Cynthia who drew him thither; and if the latter had been
a little more amenable to reason, her mother would have made more
frequent allusions than she did to the crisis which she thought was
approaching. But she was restrained by the intuitive conviction that
if her daughter became conscious of what was impending, and was made
aware of Mrs. Gibson's cautious and quiet efforts to forward the
catastrophe, the wilful girl would oppose herself to it with all
her skill and power. As it was, Mrs. Gibson trusted that Cynthia's
affections would become engaged before she knew where she was, and
that in that case she would not attempt to frustrate her mother's
delicate scheming, even though she did perceive it. But Cynthia had
come across too many varieties of flirtation, admiration, and even
passionate love, to be for a moment at fault as to the quiet friendly
nature of Osborne's attentions. She received him always as a sister
might a brother. It was different when Roger returned from his
election as Fellow of Trinity. The trembling diffidence, the hardly
suppressed ardour of his manner, made Cynthia understand before long
with what kind of love she had now to deal. She did not put it into
so many words--no, not even in her secret heart--but she recognized
the difference between Roger's relation to her and Osborne's long
before Mrs. Gibson found it out. Molly was, however, the first to
discover the nature of Roger's attention. The first time they saw
him after the ball, it came out to her observant eyes. Cynthia had
not been looking well since that evening; she went slowly about the
house, pale and heavy-eyed; and, fond as she usually was of exercise
and the free fresh air, there was hardly any persuading her now to go
out for a walk. Molly watched this fading with tender anxiety, but
to all her questions as to whether she had felt over-fatigued with
her dancing, whether anything had occurred to annoy her, and all
such inquiries, she replied in languid negatives. Once Molly touched
on Mr. Preston's name, and found that this was a subject on which
Cynthia was raw; now, Cynthia's face lighted up with spirit, and her
whole body showed her ill-repressed agitation, but she only said a
few sharp words, expressive of anything but kindly feeling towards
the gentleman, and then bade Molly never name his name to her again.
Still, the latter could not imagine that he was more than intensely
distasteful to her friend, as well as to herself; he could not be
the cause of Cynthia's present indisposition. But this indisposition
lasted so many days without change or modification, that even Mrs.
Gibson noticed it, and Molly became positively uneasy. Mrs. Gibson
considered Cynthia's quietness and languor as the natural consequence
of "dancing with everybody who asked her" at the ball. Partners whose
names were in the "Red Book" would not have produced half the amount
of fatigue, according to Mrs. Gibson's judgment apparently, and if
Cynthia had been quite well, very probably she would have hit the
blot in her mother's speech with one of her touches of sarcasm.
Then, again, when Cynthia did not rally, Mrs. Gibson grew impatient,
and accused her of being fanciful and lazy; at length, and partly
at Molly's instance, there came an appeal to Mr. Gibson, and a
professional examination of the supposed invalid, which Cynthia hated
more than anything, especially when the verdict was, that there was
nothing very much the matter, only a general lowness of tone, and
depression of health and spirits, which would soon be remedied by
tonics, and meanwhile, she was not to be roused to exertion.

"If there is one thing I dislike," said Cynthia to Mr. Gibson, after
he had pronounced tonics to be the cure for her present state, "it is
the way doctors have of giving tablespoonfuls of nauseous mixtures as
a certain remedy for sorrows and cares." She laughed up in his face
as she spoke; she had always a pretty word and smile for him, even in
the midst of her loss of spirits.

"Come! you acknowledge you have 'sorrows' by that speech: we'll make
a bargain: if you'll tell me your sorrows and cares, I'll try and
find some other remedy for them than giving you what you are pleased
to term my nauseous mixtures."

"No," said Cynthia, colouring; "I never said I had sorrows and cares;
I spoke generally. What should I have a sorrow about?--you and Molly
are only too kind to me," her eyes filling with tears.

"Well, well, we'll not talk of such gloomy things, and you shall have
some sweet emulsion to disguise the taste of the bitters I shall be
obliged to fall back upon."

"Please, don't. If you but knew how I dislike emulsions and
disguises! I do want bitters--and if I sometimes--if I'm obliged
to--if I'm not truthful myself, I do like truth in others--at least,
sometimes." She ended her sentence with another smile, but it was
rather faint and watery.

Now the first person out of the house to notice Cynthia's change of
look and manner was Roger Hamley--and yet he did not see her until,
under the influence of the nauseous mixture, she was beginning to
recover. But his eyes were scarcely off her during the first five
minutes he was in the room. All the time he was trying to talk
to Mrs. Gibson in reply to her civil platitudes, he was studying
Cynthia; and at the first convenient pause he came and stood before
Molly, so as to interpose his person between her and the rest of the
room; for some visitors had come in subsequent to his entrance.

"Molly, how ill your sister is looking! What is it? Has she had
advice? You must forgive me, but so often those who live together in
the same house don't observe the first approaches of illness."

Now Molly's love for Cynthia was fast and unwavering, but if anything
tried it, it was the habit Roger had fallen into of always calling
Cynthia Molly's sister in speaking to the latter. From any one else
it would have been a matter of indifference to her, and hardly to be
noticed; it vexed both ear and heart when Roger used the expression;
and there was a curtness of manner as well as of words in her reply.

"Oh! she was over-tired by the ball. Papa has seen her, and says she
will be all right very soon."

"I wonder if she wants change of air?" said Roger, meditatively. "I
wish--I do wish we could have her at the Hall; you and your mother
too, of course. But I don't see how it would be possible--or else how
charming it would be!"

Molly felt as if a visit to the Hall under such circumstances would
be altogether so different an affair to all her former ones, that she
could hardly tell if she should like it or not.

Roger went on,--

"You got our flowers in time, did you not? Ah! you don't know how
often I thought of you that evening! And you enjoyed it too, didn't
you?--you had plenty of agreeable partners, and all that makes a
first ball delightful? I heard that your sister danced every dance."

"It was very pleasant," said Molly, quietly. "But, after all, I'm not
sure if I want to go to another just yet; there seems to be so much
trouble connected with a ball."

"Ah! you are thinking of your sister, and her not being well?"

"No, I was not," said Molly, rather bluntly. "I was thinking of the
dress, and the dressing, and the weariness the next day."

He might think her unfeeling if he liked; she felt as if she had only
too much feeling just then, for it was bringing on her a strange
contraction of heart. But he was too inherently good himself to put
any harsh construction on her speech. Just before he went away, while
he was ostensibly holding her hand and wishing her good-by, he said
to her in a voice too low to be generally heard,--

"Is there anything I could do for your sister? We have plenty of
books, as you know, if she cares for reading." Then, receiving no
affirmative look or word from Molly in reply to this suggestion,
he went on,--"Or flowers? she likes flowers. Oh! and our forced
strawberries are just ready--I will bring some over to-morrow."

"I am sure she will like them," said Molly.

For some reason or other, unknown to the Gibsons, a longer interval
than usual occurred between Osborne's visits, while Roger came almost
every day, always with some fresh offering by which he openly sought
to relieve Cynthia's indisposition as far as it lay in his power.
Her manner to him was so gentle and gracious that Mrs. Gibson became
alarmed, lest, in spite of his "uncouthness" (as she was pleased
to term it), he might come to be preferred to Osborne, who was so
strangely neglecting his own interests, in Mrs. Gibson's opinion. In
her quiet way, she contrived to pass many slights upon Roger; but the
darts rebounded from his generous nature that could not have imagined
her motives, and fastened themselves on Molly. She had often been
called naughty and passionate when she was a child; and she thought
now that she began to understand that she really had a violent
temper. What seemed neither to hurt Roger nor annoy Cynthia made
Molly's blood boil; and now she had once discovered Mrs. Gibson's
wish to make Roger's visits shorter and less frequent, she was
always on the watch for indications of this desire. She read her
stepmother's heart when the latter made allusions to the Squire's
loneliness, now that Osborne was absent from the Hall, and that Roger
was so often away amongst his friends during the day,--

"Mr. Gibson and I should be so delighted if you could have stopped to
dinner; but, of course, we cannot be so selfish as to ask you to stay
when we remember how your father would be left alone. We were saying
yesterday we wondered how he bore his solitude, poor old gentleman!"

Or, as soon as Roger came with his bunch of early roses, it was
desirable for Cynthia to go and rest in her own room, while Molly
had to accompany Mrs. Gibson on some improvised errand or call.
Still Roger, whose object was to give pleasure to Cynthia, and who
had, from his boyhood, been always certain of Mr. Gibson's friendly
regard, was slow to perceive that he was not wanted. If he did not
see Cynthia, that was his loss; at any rate, he heard how she was,
and left her some little thing which he believed she would like, and
was willing to risk the chance of his own gratification by calling
four or five times in the hope of seeing her once. At last there came
a day when Mrs. Gibson went beyond her usual negative snubbiness,
and when, in some unwonted fit of crossness, for she was a very
placid-tempered person in general, she was guilty of positive
rudeness.

Cynthia was very much better. Tonics had ministered to a mind
diseased, though she hated to acknowledge it; her pretty bloom and
much of her light-heartedness had come back, and there was no cause
remaining for anxiety. Mrs. Gibson was sitting at her embroidery
in the drawing-room, and the two girls were at the window, Cynthia
laughing at Molly's earnest endeavours to imitate the French accent
in which the former had been reading a page of Voltaire. For
the duty, or the farce, of settling to "improving reading" in
the mornings was still kept up, although Lord Hollingford, the
unconscious suggestor of the idea, had gone back to town without
making any of the efforts to see Molly again that Mrs. Gibson had
anticipated on the night of the ball. That Alnaschar vision had
fallen to the ground. It was as yet early morning; a delicious,
fresh, lovely June day, the air redolent with the scents of
flower-growth and bloom; and half the time the girls had been
ostensibly employed in the French reading they had been leaning out
of the open window trying to reach a cluster of climbing roses. They
had secured them at last, and the buds lay on Cynthia's lap, but many
of the petals had fallen off; so, though the perfume lingered about
the window-seat, the full beauty of the flowers had passed away. Mrs.
Gibson had once or twice reproved them for the merry noise they were
making, which hindered her in the business of counting the stitches
in her pattern; and she had set herself a certain quantity to do
that morning before going out, and was of that nature which attaches
infinite importance to fulfilling small resolutions, made about
indifferent trifles without any reason whatever.

"Mr. Roger Hamley," was announced. "So tiresome!" said Mrs. Gibson,
almost in his hearing, as she pushed away her embroidery frame. She
put out her cold, motionless hand to him, with a half-murmured word
of welcome, still eyeing her lost embroidery. He took no apparent
notice, and passed on to the window.

"How delicious!" said he. "No need for any more Hamley roses now
yours are out."

"I agree with you," said Mrs. Gibson, replying to him before either
Cynthia or Molly could speak, though he addressed his words to them.
"You have been very kind in bringing us flowers so long; but now our
own are out we need not trouble you any more."

He looked at her with a little surprise clouding his honest face; it
was perhaps more at the tone than the words. Mrs. Gibson, however,
had been bold enough to strike the first blow, and she determined
to go on as opportunity offered. Molly would perhaps have been more
pained if she had not seen Cynthia's colour rise. She waited for her
to speak, if need were; for she knew that Roger's defence, if defence
were required, might be safely entrusted to Cynthia's ready wit.

He put out his hand for the shattered cluster of roses that lay in
Cynthia's lap.

"At any rate," said he, "my trouble--if Mrs. Gibson considers it has
been a trouble to me--will be over-paid, if I may have this."

"Old lamps for new," said Cynthia, smiling as she gave it to him. "I
wish one could always buy nosegays such as you have brought us, as
cheaply."

"You forget the waste of time that, I think, we must reckon as part
of the payment," said her mother. "Really, Mr. Hamley, we must learn
to shut our doors on you if you come so often, and at such early
hours! I settle myself to my own employment regularly after breakfast
till lunch-time; and it is my wish to keep Cynthia and Molly to a
course of improving reading and study--so desirable for young people
of their age, if they are ever to become intelligent, companionable
women; but with early visitors it is quite impossible to observe any
regularity of habits."

All this was said in that sweet, false tone which of late had gone
through Molly like the scraping of a slate-pencil on a slate. Roger's
face changed. His ruddy colour grew paler for a moment, and he looked
grave and not pleased. In another moment the wonted frankness of
expression returned. Why should not he, he asked himself, believe
her? It was early to call; it did interrupt regular occupation. So he
spoke, and said,--

"I believe I have been very thoughtless--I'll not come so early
again; but I had some excuse to-day: my brother told me you had made
a plan for going to see Hurst Wood when the roses were out, and they
are earlier than usual this year--I've been round to see. He spoke of
a long day there, going before lunch--"

"The plan was made with Mr. Osborne Hamley. I could not think of
going without him!" said Mrs. Gibson, coldly.

"I had a letter from him this morning, in which he named your wish,
and he says he fears he cannot be at home till they are out of
flower. I daresay they are not much to see in reality, but the day is
so lovely I thought that the plan of going to Hurst Wood would be a
charming excuse for being out of doors."

"Thank you. How kind you are! and so good, too, in sacrificing your
natural desire to be with your father as much as possible."

"I'm glad to say my father is so much better than he was in the
winter that he spends much of his time out of doors in his fields. He
has been accustomed to go about alone, and I--we think that as great
a return to his former habits as he can be induced to make is the
best for him."

"And when do you return to Cambridge?"

There was some hesitation in Roger's manner as he replied,--

"It is uncertain. You probably know that I am a Fellow of Trinity
now. I hardly yet know what my future plans may be; I am thinking of
going up to London soon."

"Ah! London is the true place for a young man," said Mrs. Gibson,
with decision, as if she had reflected a good deal on the question.
"If it were not that we really are so busy this morning, I should
have been tempted to make an exception to our general rule; one more
exception, for your early visits have made us make too many already.
Perhaps, however, we may see you again before you go?"

"Certainly I shall come," replied he, rising to take his leave, and
still holding the demolished roses in his hand. Then, addressing
himself more especially to Cynthia, he added, "My stay in London will
not exceed a fortnight or so--is there anything I can do for you--or
you?" turning a little to Molly.

"No, thank you very much," said Cynthia, very sweetly, and then,
acting on a sudden impulse, she leant out of the window, and gathered
him some half-opened roses. "You deserve these; do throw that poor
shabby bunch away."

His eyes brightened, his cheeks glowed. He took the offered buds, but
did not throw away the other bunch.

"At any rate, I may come after lunch is over, and the afternoons and
evenings will be the most delicious time of day a month hence." He
said this to both Molly and Cynthia, but in his heart he addressed it
to the latter.

Mrs. Gibson affected not to hear what he was saying, but held out her
limp hand once more to him.

"I suppose we shall see you when you return; and pray tell your
brother how we are longing to have a visit from him again."

When he had left the room, Molly's heart was quite full. She
had watched his face, and read something of his feelings: his
disappointment at their non-acquiescence in his plan of a day's
pleasure in Hurst Wood, the delayed conviction that his presence
was not welcome to the wife of his old friend, which had come so
slowly upon him--perhaps, after all, these things touched Molly more
keenly than they did him. His bright look when Cynthia gave him the
rose-buds indicated a gush of sudden delight more vivid than the pain
he had shown by his previous increase of gravity.

"I can't think why he will come at such untimely hours," said Mrs.
Gibson, as soon as she heard him fairly out of the house. "It's
different from Osborne; we are so much more intimate with him: he
came and made friends with us all the time this stupid brother of
his was muddling his brains with mathematics at Cambridge. Fellow of
Trinity, indeed! I wish he would learn to stay there, and not come
intruding here, and assuming that because I asked Osborne to join in
a picnic it was all the same to me which brother came."

"In short, mamma, one man may steal a horse, but another must not
look over the hedge," said Cynthia, pouting a little.

"And the two brothers have always been treated so exactly alike by
their friends, and there has been such a strong friendship between
them, that it is no wonder Roger thinks he may be welcome where
Osborne is allowed to come at all hours," continued Molly, in high
dudgeon. "Roger's 'muddled brains,' indeed! Roger, 'stupid!'"

"Oh, very well, my dears! When I was young it wouldn't have been
thought becoming for girls of your age to fly out because a little
restraint was exercised as to the hours at which they should receive
the young men's calls. And they would have supposed that there might
be good reasons why their parents disapproved of the visits of
certain gentlemen, even while they were proud and pleased to see some
members of the same family."

"But that was what I said, mamma," said Cynthia, looking at her
mother with an expression of innocent bewilderment on her face. "One
man may--"

"Be quiet, child! All proverbs are vulgar, and I do believe that
is the vulgarest of all. You are really catching Roger Hamley's
coarseness, Cynthia!"

"Mamma," said Cynthia, roused to anger, "I don't mind your abusing
me, but Mr. Roger Hamley has been very kind to me while I've not
been well: I can't bear to hear him disparaged. If he's coarse, I've
no objection to be coarse as well, for it seems to me it must mean
kindliness and pleasantness, and the bringing of pretty flowers and
presents."

Molly's tears were brimming over at these words; she could have
kissed Cynthia for her warm partisanship, but, afraid of betraying
emotion, and "making a scene," as Mrs. Gibson called any signs of
warm feeling, she laid down her book hastily, and ran upstairs to
her room, and locked the door in order to breathe freely. There were
traces of tears upon her face when she returned into the drawing-room
half-an-hour afterwards, walking straight and demurely up to her
former place, where Cynthia still sate and gazed idly out of the
window, pouting and displeased; Mrs. Gibson, meanwhile, counting her
stitches aloud with great distinctness and vigour.




CHAPTER XXIX.

BUSH-FIGHTING.


During all the months that had elapsed since Mrs. Hamley's death,
Molly had wondered many a time about the secret she had so
unwittingly become possessed of that last day in the Hall library. It
seemed so utterly strange and unheard-of a thing to her inexperienced
mind, that a man should be married, and yet not live with his
wife--that a son should have entered into the holy state of matrimony
without his father's knowledge, and without being recognized as the
husband of some one known or unknown by all those with whom he came
in daily contact, that she felt occasionally as if that little ten
minutes of revelation must have been a vision in a dream. Roger
had only slightly referred to it once, and Osborne had kept entire
silence on the subject ever since. Not even a look, or a pause,
betrayed any allusion to it; it even seemed to have passed out of
their thoughts. There had been the great sad event of their mother's
death to fill their minds on the next occasion of their meeting
Molly; and since then long pauses of intercourse had taken place; so
that she sometimes felt as if both the brothers must have forgotten
how she had come to know their important secret. She even found
herself often entirely forgetting it, but perhaps the consciousness
of it was present to her unawares, and enabled her to comprehend the
real nature of Osborne's feelings towards Cynthia. At any rate, she
never for a moment had supposed that his gentle kind manner towards
Cynthia was anything but the courtesy of a friend. Strange to say, in
these latter days Molly had looked upon Osborne's relation to herself
as pretty much the same as that in which at one time she had regarded
Roger's; and she thought of the former as of some one as nearly a
brother both to Cynthia and herself, as any young man could well be,
whom they had not known in childhood, and who was in nowise related
to them. She thought that he was very much improved in manner, and
probably in character, by his mother's death. He was no longer
sarcastic, or fastidious, or vain, or self-confident. She did not
know how often all these styles of talk or of behaviour were put on
to conceal shyness or consciousness, and to veil the real self from
strangers.

Osborne's conversation and ways might very possibly have been just
the same as before, had he been thrown amongst new people; but Molly
only saw him in their own circle in which he was on terms of decided
intimacy. Still there was no doubt that he was really improved,
though perhaps not to the extent for which Molly gave him credit; and
this exaggeration on her part arose very naturally from the fact,
that he, perceiving Roger's warm admiration for Cynthia, withdrew a
little out of his brother's way; and used to go and talk to Molly in
order not to intrude himself between Roger and Cynthia. Of the two,
perhaps, Osborne preferred Molly; to her he needed not to talk if the
mood was not on him--they were on those happy terms where silence is
permissible, and where efforts to act against the prevailing mood of
the mind are not required. Sometimes, indeed, when Osborne was in the
humour to be critical and fastidious as of yore, he used to vex Roger
by insisting upon it that Molly was prettier than Cynthia.

"You mark my words, Roger. Five years hence the beautiful Cynthia's
red and white will have become just a little coarse, and her figure
will have thickened, while Molly's will only have developed into more
perfect grace. I don't believe the girl has done growing yet; I'm
sure she's taller than when I first saw her last summer."

"Miss Kirkpatrick's eyes must always be perfection. I cannot fancy
any could come up to them: soft, grave, appealing, tender; and such a
heavenly colour--I often try to find something in nature to compare
them to; they are not like violets--that blue in the eyes is too like
physical weakness of sight; they are not like the sky--that colour
has something of cruelty in it."

"Come, don't go on trying to match her eyes as if you were a draper,
and they a bit of ribbon; say at once 'her eyes are loadstars,' and
have done with it! I set up Molly's grey eyes and curling black
lashes, long odds above the other young woman's; but, of course, it's
all a matter of taste."

And now both Osborne and Roger had left the neighbourhood. In spite
of all that Mrs. Gibson had said about Roger's visits being ill-timed
and intrusive, she began to feel as if they had been a very pleasant
variety, now that they had ceased altogether. He brought in a whiff
of a new atmosphere from that of Hollingford. He and his brother had
been always ready to do numberless little things which only a man can
do for women; small services which Mr. Gibson was always too busy to
render. For the good doctor's business grew upon him. He thought that
this increase was owing to his greater skill and experience, and he
would probably have been mortified if he could have known how many
of his patients were solely biassed in sending for him, by the fact
that he was employed at the Towers. Something of this sort must have
been contemplated in the low scale of payment adopted long ago by
the Cumnor family. Of itself the money he received for going to the
Towers would hardly have paid him for horse-flesh, but then, as Lady
Cumnor in her younger days had worded it,--

"It is such a thing for a man just setting up in practice for himself
to be able to say he attends at this house!"

So the prestige was tacitly sold and paid for; but neither buyer nor
seller defined the nature of the bargain.

On the whole, it was as well that Mr. Gibson spent so much of his
time from home. He sometimes thought so himself when he heard his
wife's plaintive fret or pretty babble over totally indifferent
things, and perceived of how flimsy a nature were all her fine
sentiments. Still, he did not allow himself to repine over the step
he had taken; he wilfully shut his eyes and waxed up his ears to many
small things that he knew would have irritated him if he had attended
to them; and, in his solitary rides, he forced himself to dwell on
the positive advantages that had accrued to him and his through his
marriage. He had obtained an unexceptionable chaperone, if not a
tender mother, for his little girl; a skilful manager of his previous
disorderly household; a woman who was graceful and pleasant to
look at for the head of his table. Moreover, Cynthia reckoned for
something on the favourable side of the balance. She was a capital
companion for Molly; and the two were evidently very fond of each
other. The feminine companionship of the mother and daughter was
agreeable to him as well as to his child,--when Mrs. Gibson was
moderately sensible and not over-sentimental, he mentally added; and
then he checked himself, for he would not allow himself to become
more aware of her faults and foibles by defining them. At any rate,
she was harmless, and wonderfully just to Molly for a stepmother.
She piqued herself upon this indeed, and would often call attention
to the fact of her being unlike other women in this respect. Just
then sudden tears came into Mr. Gibson's eyes, as he remembered how
quiet and undemonstrative his little Molly had become in her general
behaviour to him; but how once or twice, when they had met upon the
stairs, or were otherwise unwitnessed, she had caught him and kissed
him--hand or cheek--in a sad passionateness of affection. But in a
moment he began to whistle an old Scotch air he had heard in his
childhood, and which had never recurred to his memory since; and
five minutes afterwards he was too busily treating a case of white
swelling in the knee of a little boy, and thinking how to relieve the
poor mother, who went out charring all day, and had to listen to the
moans of her child all night, to have any thought for his own cares,
which, if they really existed, were of so trifling a nature compared
to the hard reality of this hopeless woe.

Osborne came home first. He returned, in fact, not long after Roger
had gone away; but he was languid and unwell, and, though he did
not complain, he felt unequal to any exertion. Thus a week or more
elapsed before any of the Gibsons knew that he was at the Hall; and
then it was only by chance that they became aware of it. Mr. Gibson
met him in one of the lanes near Hamley; the acute surgeon noticed
the gait of the man as he came near, before he recognized who it was.
When he overtook him he said,--

"Why, Osborne, is it you? I thought it was an old man of fifty
loitering before me! I didn't know you had come back."


[Illustration: "WHY, OSBORNE, IS IT YOU?"]


"Yes," said Osborne, "I've been at home nearly ten days. I daresay
I ought to have called on your people, for I made a half promise to
Mrs. Gibson to let her know as soon as I returned; but the fact is,
I'm feeling very good-for-nothing,--this air oppresses me; I could
hardly breathe in the house, and yet I'm already tired with this
short walk."

"You'd better get home at once; and I'll call and see you as I come
back from Rowe's."

"No, you mustn't on any account!" said Osborne, hastily; "my father
is annoyed enough about my going from home, so often, he says, though
I hadn't been from it for six weeks. He puts down all my languor
to my having been away,--he keeps the purse-strings, you know," he
added, with a faint smile, "and I'm in the unlucky position of a
penniless heir, and I've been brought up so--In fact, I must leave
home from time to time, and, if my father gets confirmed in this
notion of his that my health is worse for my absences, he'll stop the
supplies altogether."

"May I ask where you do spend your time when you are not at Hamley
Hall?" asked Mr. Gibson, with some hesitation in his manner.

"No!" replied Osborne, reluctantly. "I will tell you this:--I
stay with friends in the country. I lead a life which ought to be
conducive to health, because it is thoroughly simple, rational, and
happy. And now I've told you more about it than my father himself
knows. He never asks me where I've been; and I shouldn't tell him if
he did--at least, I think not."

Mr. Gibson rode on by Osborne's side, not speaking for a moment or
two.

"Osborne, whatever scrapes you may have got into, I should advise
your telling your father boldly out. I know him; and I know he'll be
angry enough at first, but he'll come round, take my word for it;
and, somehow or another, he'll find money to pay your debts and set
you free, if it's that kind of difficulty; and if it's any other
kind of entanglement, why still he's your best friend. It's this
estrangement from your father that's telling on your health, I'll be
bound."

"No," said Osborne, "I beg your pardon; but it's not that; I am
really out of order. I daresay my unwillingness to encounter any
displeasure from my father is the consequence of my indisposition;
but I'll answer for it, it is not the cause of it. My instinct tells
me there is something really the matter with me."

"Come, don't be setting up your instinct against the profession,"
said Mr. Gibson, cheerily.

He dismounted, and throwing the reins of his horse round his arm, he
looked at Osborne's tongue and felt his pulse, asking him various
questions. At the end he said,--

"We'll soon bring you about, though I should like a little more quiet
talk with you, without this tugging brute for a third. If you'll
manage to ride over and lunch with us to-morrow, Dr. Nicholls will
be with us; he's coming over to see old Rowe; and you shall have the
benefit of the advice of two doctors instead of one. Go home now,
you've had enough exercise for the middle of a day as hot as this is.
And don't mope in the house, listening to the maunderings of your
stupid instinct."

"What else have I to do?" said Osborne. "My father and I are not
companions; one can't read and write for ever, especially when
there's no end to be gained by it. I don't mind telling you--but in
confidence, recollect--that I've been trying to get some of my poems
published; but there's no one like a publisher for taking the conceit
out of one. Not a man among them would have them as a gift."

"Oho! so that's it, is it, Master Osborne? I thought there was some
mental cause for this depression of health. I wouldn't trouble my
head about it, if I were you, though that's always very easily said,
I know. Try your hand at prose, if you can't manage to please the
publishers with poetry; but, at any rate, don't go on fretting
over spilt milk. But I mustn't lose my time here. Come over to us
to-morrow, as I said; and what with the wisdom of two doctors, and
the wit and folly of three women, I think we shall cheer you up a
bit."

So saying, Mr. Gibson remounted, and rode away at the long, slinging
trot so well known to the country people as the doctor's pace.

"I don't like his looks," thought Mr. Gibson to himself at night,
as over his daybooks he reviewed the events of the day. "And then
his pulse. But how often we're all mistaken; and, ten to one, my own
hidden enemy lies closer to me than his does to him--even taking the
worse view of the case."

Osborne made his appearance a considerable time before luncheon
the next morning; and no one objected to the earliness of his call.
He was feeling better. There were few signs of the invalid about
him; and what few there were disappeared under the bright pleasant
influence of such a welcome as he received from all. Molly and
Cynthia had much to tell him of the small proceedings since he went
away, or to relate the conclusions of half-accomplished projects.
Cynthia was often on the point of some gay, careless inquiry as
to where he had been, and what he had been doing; but Molly, who
conjectured the truth, as often interfered to spare him the pain of
equivocation--a pain that her tender conscience would have felt for
him, much more than he would have felt it for himself.

Mrs. Gibson's talk was desultory, complimentary, and sentimental,
after her usual fashion; but still, on the whole, though Osborne
smiled to himself at much that she said, it was soothing and
agreeable. Presently, Dr. Nicholls and Mr. Gibson came in; the former
had had some conference with the latter on the subject of Osborne's
health; and, from time to time, the skilful old physician's sharp and
observant eyes gave a comprehensive look at Osborne.

Then there was lunch, when every one was merry and hungry, excepting
the hostess, who was trying to train her midday appetite into
the genteelest of all ways, and thought (falsely enough) that Dr.
Nicholls was a good person to practise the semblance of ill-health
upon, and that he would give her the proper civil amount of
commiseration for her ailments, which every guest ought to bestow
upon a hostess who complains of her delicacy of health. The old
doctor was too cunning a man to fall into this trap. He would keep
recommending her to try the coarsest viands on the table; and, at
last, he told her if she could not fancy the cold beef to try a
little with pickled onions. There was a twinkle in his eye as he said
this, that would have betrayed his humour to any observer; but Mr.
Gibson, Cynthia, and Molly were all attacking Osborne on the subject
of some literary preference he had expressed, and Dr. Nicholls had
Mrs. Gibson quite at his mercy. She was not sorry when luncheon was
over to leave the room to the three gentlemen; and ever afterwards
she spoke of Dr. Nicholls as "that bear."

Presently, Osborne came upstairs, and, after his old fashion, began
to take up new books, and to question the girls as to their music.
Mrs. Gibson had to go out and pay some calls, so she left the three
together; and after a while they adjourned into the garden, Osborne
lounging on a chair, while Molly employed herself busily in tying up
carnations, and Cynthia gathered flowers in her careless, graceful
way.

"I hope you notice the difference in our occupations, Mr. Hamley.
Molly, you see, devotes herself to the useful, and I to the
ornamental. Please, under what head do you class what you are doing?
I think you might help one of us, instead of looking on like the
Grand Seigneur."

"I don't know what I can do," said he, rather plaintively. "I should
like to be useful, but I don't know how; and my day is past for
purely ornamental work. You must let me be, I'm afraid. Besides, I'm
really rather exhausted by being questioned and pulled about by those
good doctors."

"Why, you don't mean to say they have been attacking you since
lunch!" exclaimed Molly.

"Yes; indeed, they have; and they might have gone on till now if Mrs.
Gibson had not come in opportunely."

"I thought mamma had gone out some time ago!" said Cynthia, catching
wafts of the conversation as she flitted hither and thither among the
flowers.

"She came into the dining-room not five minutes ago. Do you want her,
for I see her crossing the hall at this very moment?" and Osborne
half rose.

"Oh, not at all!" said Cynthia. "Only she seemed to be in such a
hurry to go out, I fancied she had set off long ago. She had some
errand to do for Lady Cumnor, and she thought she could manage to
catch the housekeeper, who is always in the town on Thursday."

"Are the family coming to the Towers this autumn?"

"I believe so. But I don't know, and I don't much care. They don't
take kindly to me," continued Cynthia, "and so I suppose I'm not
generous enough to take kindly to them."

"I should have thought that such a very unusual blot in their
discrimination would have interested you in them as extraordinary
people," said Osborne, with a little air of conscious gallantry.

"Isn't that a compliment?" said Cynthia, after a pause of mock
meditation. "If any one pays me a compliment, please let it be short
and clear. I'm very stupid at finding out hidden meanings."

"Then such speeches as 'you are very pretty,' or 'you have charming
manners,' are what you prefer. Now, I pique myself on wrapping up my
sugar-plums delicately."

"Then would you please to write them down, and at my leisure I'll
parse them."

"No! It would be too much trouble. I'll meet you half-way, and study
clearness next time."

"What are you two talking about?" said Molly, resting on her light
spade.

"It's only a discussion on the best way of administering
compliments," said Cynthia, taking up her flower-basket again, but
not going out of the reach of the conversation.

"I don't like them at all in any way," said Molly. "But, perhaps,
it's rather sour grapes with me," she added.

"Nonsense!" said Osborne. "Shall I tell you what I heard of you at
the ball?"

"Or shall I provoke Mr. Preston," said Cynthia, "to begin upon you?
It's like turning a tap, such a stream of pretty speeches flows out
at the moment." Her lip curled with scorn.

"For you, perhaps," said Molly; "but not for me."

"For any woman. It's his notion of making himself agreeable. If you
dare me, Molly, I'll try the experiment, and you'll see with what
success."

"No, don't, pray!" said Molly, in a hurry. "I do so dislike him!"

"Why?" said Osborne, roused to a little curiosity by her vehemence.

"Oh! I don't know. He never seems to know what one is feeling."

"He wouldn't care if he did know," said Cynthia. "And he might know
he is not wanted."

"If he chooses to stay, he cares little whether he is wanted or not."

"Come, this is very interesting," said Osborne. "It is like the
strophe and anti-strophe in a Greek chorus. Pray, go on."

"Don't you know him?" asked Molly.

"Yes, by sight, and I think we were once introduced. But, you know,
we are much farther from Ashcombe, at Hamley, than you are here, at
Hollingford."

"Oh! but he's coming to take Mr. Sheepshanks' place, and then he'll
live here altogether," said Molly.

"Molly! who told you that?" said Cynthia, in quite a different tone
of voice from that in which she had been speaking hitherto.

"Papa,--didn't you hear him? Oh, no! it was before you were down this
morning. Papa met Mr. Sheepshanks yesterday, and he told him it was
all settled: you know we heard a rumour about it in the spring!"

Cynthia was very silent after this. Presently, she said that she had
gathered all the flowers she wanted, and that the heat was so great
she would go indoors. And then Osborne went away. But Molly had set
herself a task to dig up such roots as had already flowered, and to
put down some bedding-out plants in their stead. Tired and heated as
she was she finished it, and then went upstairs to rest, and change
her dress. According to her wont, she sought for Cynthia; there was
no reply to her soft knock at the bedroom-door opposite to her own,
and, thinking that Cynthia might have fallen asleep, and be lying
uncovered in the draught of the open window, she went in softly.
Cynthia was lying upon the bed as if she had thrown herself down on
it without caring for the ease or comfort of her position. She was
very still; and Molly took a shawl, and was going to place it over
her, when she opened her eyes, and spoke,--

"Is that you, dear? Don't go. I like to know that you are there."

She shut her eyes again, and remained quite quiet for a few minutes
longer. Then she started up into a sitting posture, pushed her hair
away from her forehead and burning eyes, and gazed intently at Molly.

"Do you know what I've been thinking, dear?" said she. "I think I've
been long enough here, and that I had better go out as a governess."

"Cynthia! what do you mean?" asked Molly, aghast. "You've been
asleep--you've been dreaming. You're over-tired," continued she,
sitting down on the bed, and taking Cynthia's passive hand, and
stroking it softly--a mode of caressing that had come down to her
from her mother--whether as an hereditary instinct, or as a lingering
remembrance of the tender ways of the dead woman, Mr. Gibson often
wondered within himself when he observed it.

"Oh, how good you are, Molly! I wonder, if I had been brought up like
you, whether I should have been as good. But I've been tossed about
so."

"Then, don't go and be tossed about any more," said Molly, softly.

"Oh, dear! I had better go. But, you see, no one ever loved me like
you, and, I think, your father--doesn't he, Molly? And it's hard to
be driven out."

"Cynthia, I am sure you're not well, or else you're not half awake."

Cynthia sate with her arms encircling her knees, and looking at
vacancy.

"Well!" said she, at last, heaving a great sigh; but, then, smiling
as she caught Molly's anxious face, "I suppose there's no escaping
one's doom; and anywhere else I should be much more forlorn and
unprotected."

"What do you mean by your doom?"

"Ah, that's telling, little one," said Cynthia, who seemed now to
have recovered her usual manner. "I don't mean to have one, though. I
think that, though I am an arrant coward at heart, I can show fight."

"With whom?" asked Molly, really anxious to probe the mystery--if,
indeed, there was one--to the bottom, in the hope of some remedy
being found for the distress Cynthia was in when first Molly entered.

Again Cynthia was lost in thought; then, catching the echo of Molly's
last words in her mind, she said,--

"'With whom?'--oh! show fight with whom?--why, my doom, to be sure.
Am not I a grand young lady to have a doom? Why, Molly, child, how
pale and grave you look!" said she, kissing her all of a sudden. "You
ought not to care so much for me; I'm not good enough for you to
worry yourself about me. I've given myself up a long time ago as a
heartless baggage!"

"Nonsense! I wish you wouldn't talk so, Cynthia!"

"And I wish you wouldn't always take me 'at the foot of the letter,'
as an English girl at school used to translate it. Oh, how hot it
is! Is it never going to get cool again? My child! what dirty hands
you've got, and face too; and I've been kissing you--I daresay I'm
dirty with it, too. Now, isn't that like one of mamma's speeches?
But, for all that, you look more like a delving Adam than a spinning
Eve." This had the effect that Cynthia intended; the daintily clean
Molly became conscious of her soiled condition, which she had
forgotten while she had been attending to Cynthia, and she hastily
withdrew to her own room. When she had gone, Cynthia noiselessly
locked the door; and, taking her purse out of her desk, she began to
count over her money. She counted it once--she counted it twice, as
if desirous of finding out some mistake which should prove it to be
more than it was; but the end of it all was a sigh.

"What a fool!--what a fool I was!" said she, at length. "But even if
I don't go out as a governess, I shall make it up in time."

Some weeks after the time he had anticipated when he had spoken of
his departure to the Gibsons, Roger returned back to the Hall. One
morning when he called, Osborne told them that his brother had been
at home for two or three days.

"And why has he not come here, then?" said Mrs. Gibson. "It is not
kind of him not to come and see us as soon as he can. Tell him I say
so--pray do."

Osborne had gained one or two ideas as to her treatment of Roger the
last time he had called. Roger had not complained of it, or even
mentioned it, till that very morning; when Osborne was on the point
of starting, and had urged Roger to accompany him, the latter had
told him something of what Mrs. Gibson had said. He spoke rather as
if he was more amused than annoyed; but Osborne could read that he
was chagrined at those restrictions placed upon calls which were the
greatest pleasure of his life. Neither of them let out the suspicion
which had entered both their minds--the well-grounded suspicion
arising from the fact that Osborne's visits, be they paid early or
late, had never yet been met with a repulse.

Osborne now reproached himself with having done Mrs. Gibson
injustice. She was evidently a weak, but probably a disinterested,
woman; and it was only a little bit of ill-temper on her part which
had caused her to speak to Roger as she had done.

"I daresay it was rather impertinent of me to call at such an
untimely hour," said Roger.

"Not at all; I call at all hours, and nothing is ever said about it.
It was just because she was put out that morning. I'll answer for it
she's sorry now, and I'm sure you may go there at any time you like
in the future."

Still, Roger did not choose to go again for two or three weeks, and
the consequence was that the next time he called the ladies were out.
Once again he had the same ill-luck, and then he received a little
pretty three-cornered note from Mrs. Gibson:--


   MY DEAR SIR,

   How is it that you are become so formal all on a sudden,
   leaving cards, instead of awaiting our return? Fie for
   shame! If you had seen the faces of disappointment that
   I did when the horrid little bits of pasteboard were
   displayed to our view, you would not have borne malice
   against me so long; for it is really punishing others as
   well as my naughty self. If you will come to-morrow--as
   early as you like--and lunch with us, I'll own I was
   cross, and acknowledge myself a penitent.--Yours ever,

   HYACINTH C. K. GIBSON.


There was no resisting this, even if there had not been strong
inclination to back up the pretty words. Roger went, and Mrs. Gibson
caressed and petted him in her sweetest, silkiest manner. Cynthia
looked lovelier than ever to him for the slight restriction that
had been laid for a time on their intercourse. She might be gay
and sparkling with Osborne; with Roger she was soft and grave.
Instinctively she knew her men. She saw that Osborne was only
interested in her because of her position in a family with whom he
was intimate; that his friendship was without the least touch of
sentiment; and that his admiration was only the warm criticism of
an artist for unusual beauty. But she felt how different Roger's
relation to her was. To him she was _the_ one, alone, peerless. If
his love was prohibited, it would be long years before he could
sink down into tepid friendship; and to him her personal loveliness
was only one of the many charms that made him tremble into passion.
Cynthia was not capable of returning such feelings; she had had too
little true love in her life, and perhaps too much admiration to do
so; but she appreciated this honest ardour, this loyal worship that
was new to her experience. Such appreciation, and such respect for
his true and affectionate nature, gave a serious tenderness to her
manner to Roger, which allured him with a fresh and separate grace.
Molly sate by, and wondered how it would all end, or, rather, how
soon it would all end, for she thought that no girl could resist such
reverent passion; and on Roger's side there could be no doubt--alas!
there could be no doubt. An older spectator might have looked far
ahead, and thought of the question of pounds, shillings, and pence.
Where was the necessary income for a marriage to come from? Roger
had his Fellowship now, it is true; but the income of that would be
lost if he married; he had no profession, and the life interest of
the two or three thousand pounds that he inherited from his mother,
belonged to his father. This older spectator might have been a little
surprised at the _empressement_ of Mrs. Gibson's manner to a younger
son, always supposing this said spectator to have read to the depths
of her worldly heart. Never had she tried to be more agreeable to
Osborne; and though her attempt was a great failure when practised
upon Roger, and he did not know what to say in reply to the delicate
flatteries which he felt to be insincere, he saw that she intended
him to consider himself henceforward free of the house; and he was
too glad to avail himself of this privilege to examine over-closely
into what might be her motives for her change of manner. He shut his
eyes, and chose to believe that she was now desirous of making up for
her little burst of temper on his previous visit.

The result of Osborne's conference with the two doctors had been
certain prescriptions which appeared to have done him much good,
and which would in all probability have done him yet more, could he
have been free of the recollection of the little patient wife in
her solitude near Winchester. He went to her whenever he could; and,
thanks to Roger, money was far more plentiful with him now than it
had been. But he still shrank, and perhaps even more and more, from
telling his father of his marriage. Some bodily instinct made him
dread all agitation inexpressibly. If he had not had this money from
Roger, he might have been compelled to tell his father all, and to
ask for the necessary funds to provide for the wife and the coming
child. But with enough in hand, and a secret, though remorseful,
conviction that as long as Roger had a penny his brother was sure to
have half of it, made him more reluctant than ever to irritate his
father by a revelation of his secret. "Not just yet, not just at
present," he kept saying both to Roger and to himself. "By-and-by, if
we have a boy, I will call it Roger"--and then visions of poetical
and romantic reconciliations brought about between father and son,
through the medium of a child, the offspring of a forbidden marriage,
became still more vividly possible to him, and at any rate it was a
staving-off of an unpleasant thing. He atoned to himself for taking
so much of Roger's Fellowship money by reflecting that, if Roger
married, he would lose this source of revenue; yet Osborne was
throwing no impediment in the way of this event, rather forwarding it
by promoting every possible means of his brother's seeing the lady of
his love. Osborne ended his reflections by convincing himself of his
own generosity.




CHAPTER XXX.

OLD WAYS AND NEW WAYS.


[Illustration (untitled)]

Mr. Preston was now installed in his new house at Hollingford; Mr.
Sheepshanks having entered into dignified idleness at the house of
his married daughter, who lived in the county town. His successor
had plunged with energy into all manner of improvements; and
among others, he fell to draining a piece of outlying waste and
unreclaimed land of Lord Cumnor's, which was close to Squire Hamley's
property--that very piece for which he had had the Government grant,
but which now lay neglected, and only half drained, with stacks of
mossy tiles, and lines of upturned furrows telling of abortive plans.
It was not often that the Squire rode in this direction now-a-days;
but the cottage of a man who had been the squire's gamekeeper
in those more prosperous days when the Hamleys could afford to
"preserve," was close to the rush-grown ground. This old servant and
tenant was ill, and had sent a message up to the Hall, asking to see
the Squire: not to reveal any secret, or to say anything particular,
but only from the feudal loyalty, which made it seem to the dying man
as if it would be a comfort to shake the hand, and look once more
into the eyes of the lord and master whom he had served, and whose
ancestors his own forbears had served for so many generations. And
the Squire was as fully alive as old Silas to the claims of the tie
that existed between them. Though he hated the thought, and still
more, should hate the sight of the piece of land, on the side of
which Silas's cottage stood, the Squire ordered his horse, and rode
off within half-an-hour of receiving the message. As he drew near
the spot he thought he heard the sound of tools, and the hum of
many voices, just as he used to hear them a year or two before. He
listened with surprise. Yes! Instead of the still solitude he had
expected, there was the clink of iron, the heavy gradual thud of the
fall of barrows-ful of soil--the cry and shout of labourers. But not
on his land--better worth expense and trouble by far than the reedy
clay common on which the men were, in fact, employed. He knew it was
Lord Cumnor's property; and he knew Lord Cumnor and his family had
gone up in the world ("the Whig rascals!"), both in wealth and in
station, as the Hamleys had gone down. But all the same--in spite
of long known facts, and in spite of reason--the Squire's ready
anger rose high at the sight of his neighbour doing what he had been
unable to do, and he a Whig, and his family only in the county since
Queen Anne's time. He went so far as to wonder whether they might
not--the labourers he meant--avail themselves of his tiles, lying so
conveniently close to hand. All these thoughts, regrets, and wonders
were in his mind as he rode up to the cottage he was bound to, and
gave his horse in charge to a little lad, who had hitherto found his
morning's business and amusement in playing at "houses" with a still
younger sister, with some of the Squire's neglected tiles. But he
was old Silas's grandson, and he might have battered the rude red
earthenware to pieces--a whole stack--one by one, and the Squire
would have said little or nothing. It was only that he would not
spare one to a labourer of Lord Cumnor's. No! not one.

Old Silas lay in a sort of closet, opening out of the family
living-room. The small window that gave it light looked right on to
the "moor," as it was called; and by day the check curtain was drawn
aside so that he might watch the progress of the labour. Everything
about the old man was clean, if coarse; and, with Death, the
leveller, so close at hand, it was the labourer who made the first
advances, and put out his horny hand to the Squire.

"I thought you'd come, Squire. Your father came for to see my father
as he lay a-dying."

"Come, come, my man!" said the Squire, easily affected, as he always
was. "Don't talk of dying, we shall soon have you out, never fear.
They've sent you up some soup from the Hall, as I bade 'em, haven't
they?"

"Ay, ay, I've had all as I could want for to eat and to drink. The
young squire and Master Roger was here yesterday."

"Yes, I know."

"But I'm a deal nearer Heaven to-day, I am. I should like you to look
after th' covers in th' West Spinney, Squire; them gorse, you know,
where th' old fox had her hole--her as give 'em so many a run. You'll
mind it, Squire, though you was but a lad. I could laugh to think on
her tricks yet." And, with a weak attempt at a laugh, he got himself
into a violent fit of coughing, which alarmed the squire, who thought
he would never get his breath again. His daughter-in-law came in
at the sound, and told the Squire that he had these coughing-bouts
very frequently, and that she thought he would go off in one of them
before long. This opinion of hers was spoken simply out before the
old man, who now lay gasping and exhausted upon his pillow. Poor
people acknowledge the inevitableness and the approach of death in
a much more straightforward manner than is customary among more
educated folk. The Squire was shocked at her hard-heartedness, as
he considered it; but the old man himself had received much tender
kindness from his daughter-in-law; and what she had just said was no
more news to him than the fact that the sun would rise to-morrow. He
was more anxious to go on with his story.

"Them navvies--I call 'em navvies because some on 'em is strangers,
though some on 'em is th' men as was turned off your own works,
squire, when there came orders to stop 'em last fall--they're
a-pulling up gorse and brush to light their fire for warming up their
messes. It's a long way off to their homes, and they mostly dine
here; and there'll be nothing of a cover left, if you don't see after
'em. I thought I should like to tell ye afore I died. Parson's been
here; but I did na tell him. He's all for the earl's folk, and he'd
not ha' heeded. It's the earl as put him into his church, I reckon,
for he said what a fine thing it were for to see so much employment
a-given to the poor, and he never said nought o' th' sort when your
works were agait, Squire."

This long speech had been interrupted by many a cough and gasp for
breath; and having delivered himself of what was on his mind, he
turned his face to the wall, and appeared to be going to sleep.
Presently he roused himself with a start:--

"I know I flogged him well, I did. But he were after pheasants' eggs,
and I didn't know he were an orphan. Lord, forgive me!"

"He's thinking on David Morton, the cripple, as used to go about
trapping vermin," whispered the woman.

"Why, he died long ago--twenty year, I should think," replied the
Squire.

"Ay, but when grandfather goes off i' this way to sleep after a bout
of talking he seems to be dreaming on old times. He'll not waken up
yet, sir; you'd best sit down if you'd like to stay," she continued,
as she went into the house-place and dusted a chair with her apron.
"He was very particular in bidding me wake him if he were asleep, and
you or Mr. Roger was to call. Mr. Roger said he'd be coming again
this morning--but he'll likely sleep an hour or more, if he's let
alone."

"I wish I'd said good-by, I should like to have done that."

"He drops off so sudden," said the woman. "But if you'd be better
pleased to have said it, Squire, I'll waken him up a bit."

"No, no!" the Squire called out as the woman was going to be as good
as her word. "I'll come again, perhaps to-morrow. And tell him I was
sorry; for I am indeed. And be sure and send to the Hall for anything
you want! Mr. Roger is coming, is he? He'll bring me word how he is,
later on. I should like to have bidden him good-by."

So, giving sixpence to the child who had held his horse, the Squire
mounted. He sate still a moment, looking at the busy work going on
before him, and then at his own half-completed drainage. It was a
bitter pill. He had objected to borrowing from Government, in the
first instance; and then his wife had persuaded him to the step; and
after it was once taken, he was as proud as could be of the only
concession to the spirit of progress he ever made in his life. He had
read and studied the subject pretty thoroughly, if also very slowly,
during the time his wife had been influencing him. He was tolerably
well up in agriculture, if in nothing else; and at one time he had
taken the lead among the neighbouring landowners, when he first began
tile-drainage. In those days people used to speak of Squire Hamley's
hobby; and at market ordinaries, or county dinners, they rather
dreaded setting him off on long repetitions of arguments from the
different pamphlets on the subject which he had read. And now the
proprietors all around him were draining--draining; his interest
to Government was running on all the same, though his works were
stopped, and his tiles deteriorating in value. It was not a soothing
consideration, and the Squire was almost ready to quarrel with his
shadow. He wanted a vent for his ill-humour; and suddenly remembering
the devastations on his covers, which he had heard about not a
quarter of an hour before, he rode towards the men busy at work on
Lord Cumnor's land. Just before he got up to them he encountered
Mr. Preston, also on horseback, come to overlook his labourers. The
Squire did not know him personally, but from the agent's manner
of speaking, and the deference that was evidently paid to him, Mr.
Hamley saw that he was a responsible person. So he addressed the
agent:--"I beg your pardon, I suppose you are the manager of these
works?"

Mr. Preston replied,--"Certainly. I am that and many other things
besides, at your service. I have succeeded Mr. Sheepshanks in the
management of my lord's property. Mr. Hamley of Hamley, I believe?"

The Squire bowed stiffly. He did not like his name to be asked or
presumed upon in that manner. An equal might conjecture who he was,
or recognize him, but, till he announced himself, an inferior had no
right to do more than address him respectfully as "sir." That was the
Squire's code of etiquette.

"I am Mr. Hamley of Hamley. I suppose you are as yet ignorant of the
boundary of Lord Cumnor's land, and so I will inform you that my
property begins at the pond yonder--just where you see the rise in
the ground."

"I am perfectly acquainted with that fact, Mr. Hamley," said Mr.
Preston, a little annoyed at the ignorance attributed to him. "But
may I inquire why my attention is called to it just now?"

The Squire was beginning to boil over; but he tried to keep his
temper in. The effort was very much to be respected, for it was a
great one. There was something in the handsome and well-dressed
agent's tone and manner inexpressibly irritating to the squire, and
it was not lessened by an involuntary comparison of the capital
roadster on which Mr. Preston was mounted with his own ill-groomed
and aged cob.

"I have been told that your men out yonder do not respect these
boundaries, but are in the habit of plucking up gorse from my covers
to light their fires."

"It is possible they may!" said Mr. Preston, lifting his eyebrows,
his manner being more nonchalant than his words. "I daresay they
think no great harm of it. However, I'll inquire."

"Do you doubt my word, sir?" said the Squire, fretting his mare till
she began to dance about. "I tell you I've heard it only within this
last half-hour."

"I don't mean to doubt your word, Mr. Hamley; it's the last thing
I should think of doing. But you must excuse my saying that the
argument which you have twice brought up for the authenticity of your
statement, 'that you have heard it within the last half-hour,' is not
quite so forcible as to preclude the possibility of a mistake."

"I wish you'd only say in plain language that you doubt my word,"
said the Squire, clenching and slightly raising his horsewhip. "I
can't make out what you mean--you use so many words."

"Pray don't lose your temper, sir. I said I should inquire. You have
not seen the men pulling up gorse yourself, or you would have named
it. I, surely, may doubt the correctness of your information until
I have made some inquiry; at any rate, that is the course I shall
pursue, and if it gives you offence, I shall be sorry, but I shall
do it just the same. When I am convinced that harm has been done to
your property, I shall take steps to prevent it for the future, and
of course, in my lord's name, I shall pay you compensation--it may
probably amount to half-a-crown." He added these last words in a
lower tone, as if to himself, with a slight contemptuous smile on his
face.

"Quiet, mare, quiet," said the Squire, totally unaware that he was
the cause of her impatient movements by the way he was perpetually
tightening her reins; and also, perhaps, he unconsciously addressed
the injunction to himself.

Neither of them saw Roger Hamley, who was just then approaching them
with long, steady steps. He had seen his father from the door of old
Silas's cottage, and, as the poor fellow was still asleep, he was
coming to speak to his father, and was near enough now to hear the
next words.

"I don't know who you are, but I've known land-agents who were
gentlemen, and I've known some who were not. You belong to this last
set, young man," said the squire, "that you do. I should like to try
my horsewhip on you for your insolence."

"Pray, Mr. Hamley," replied Mr. Preston, coolly, "curb your temper a
little, and reflect. I really feel sorry to see a man of your age in
such a passion:"--moving a little farther off, however, but really
more with a desire to save the irritated man from carrying his threat
into execution, out of a dislike to the slander and excitement it
would cause, than from any personal dread. Just at this moment Roger
Hamley came close up. He was panting a little, and his eyes were very
stern and dark; but he spoke quietly enough.

"Mr. Preston, I can hardly understand what you mean by your last
words. But, remember, my father is a gentleman of age and position,
and not accustomed to receive advice as to the management of his
temper from young men like you."


[Illustration: THE BURNING OF THE GORSE.]


"I desired him to keep his men off my land," said the Squire to
his son--his wish to stand well in Roger's opinion restraining his
temper a little; but though his words might be a little calmer, there
were all other signs of passion present--the discoloured complexion,
the trembling hands, the fiery cloud in his eyes. "He refused, and
doubted my word."

Mr. Preston turned to Roger, as if appealing from Philip drunk to
Philip sober, and spoke in a tone of cool explanation, which, though
not insolent in words, was excessively irritating in manner.

"Your father has misunderstood me--perhaps it is no wonder," trying
to convey, by a look of intelligence at the son, his opinion that the
father was in no state to hear reason. "I never refused to do what
was just and right. I only required further evidence as to the past
wrong-doing; your father took offence at this," and then he shrugged
his shoulders, and lifted his eyebrows in a manner he had formerly
learnt in France.

"At any rate, sir! I can scarcely reconcile the manner and words
to my father, which I heard you use when I first came up, with the
deference you ought to have shown to a man of his age and position.
As to the fact of the trespass--"

"They are pulling up all the gorse, Roger--there'll be no cover
whatever for game soon," put in the Squire.

Roger bowed to his father, but took up his speech at the point it was
at before the interruption.

"I will inquire into it myself at a cooler moment; and if I find that
such trespass or damage has been committed, of course I shall expect
that you will see it put a stop to. Come, father! I am going to
see old Silas--perhaps you don't know that he is very ill." So he
endeavoured to wile the Squire away to prevent further words. He was
not entirely successful.

Mr. Preston was enraged by Roger's calm and dignified manner,
and threw after them this parting shaft, in the shape of a loud
soliloquy,--

"Position, indeed! What are we to think of the position of a man who
begins works like these without counting the cost, and comes to a
stand-still, and has to turn off his labourers just at the beginning
of winter, leaving--"

They were too far off to hear the rest. The Squire was on the point
of turning back before this, but Roger took hold of the reins of the
old mare, and led her over some of the boggy ground, as if to guide
her into sure footing, but, in reality, because he was determined to
prevent the renewal of the quarrel. It was well that the cob knew
him, and was, indeed, old enough to prefer quietness to dancing; for
Mr. Hamley plucked hard at the reins, and at last broke out with an
oath,--"Damn it, Roger! I'm not a child; I won't be treated as such.
Leave go, I say!"

Roger let go; they were now on firm ground, and he did not wish any
watchers to think that he was exercising any constraint over his
father; and this quiet obedience to his impatient commands did more
to soothe the Squire than anything else could have effected just
then.

"I know I turned them off--what could I do? I'd no more money for
their weekly wages; it's a loss to me, as you know. He doesn't know,
no one knows, but I think your mother would, how it cut me to turn
'em off just before winter set in. I lay awake many a night thinking
of it, and I gave them what I had--I did, indeed. I hadn't got money
to pay 'em, but I had three barren cows fattened, and gave every
scrap of meat to the men, and I let 'em go into the woods and gather
what was fallen, and I winked at their breaking off old branches, and
now to have it cast up against me by that cur--that servant. But I'll
go on with the works, by ----, I will, if only to spite him. I'll
show him who I am. My position, indeed! A Hamley of Hamley takes a
higher position than his master. I'll go on with the works, see if
I don't! I'm paying between one and two hundred a year interest on
Government money. I'll raise some more if I go to the Jews; Osborne
has shown me the way, and Osborne shall pay for it--he shall. I'll
not put up with insults. You shouldn't have stopped me, Roger! I wish
to heaven I'd horsewhipped the fellow!"

He was lashing himself again into an impotent rage, painful to a son
to witness; but just then the little grandchild of old Silas, who
had held the Squire's horse during his visit to the sick man, came
running up, breathless:

"Please, sir, please, squire, mammy has sent me; grandfather has
wakened up sudden, and mammy says he's dying, and would you please
come; she says he'd take it as a kind compliment, she's sure."

So they went to the cottage, the Squire speaking never a word, but
suddenly feeling as if lifted out of a whirlwind and set down in a
still and awful place.




CHAPTER XXXI.

A PASSIVE COQUETTE.


It is not to be supposed that such an encounter as Mr. Preston had
just had with Roger Hamley sweetened the regards in which the two
young men henceforward held each other. They had barely spoken to one
another before, and but seldom met; for the land-agent's employment
had hitherto lain at Ashcombe, some sixteen or seventeen miles from
Hamley. He was older than Roger by several years; but during the
time he had been in the county Osborne and Roger had been at school
and at college. Mr. Preston was prepared to dislike the Hamleys for
many unreasonable reasons. Cynthia and Molly had both spoken of
the brothers with familiar regard, implying considerable intimacy;
their flowers had been preferred to his on the occasion of the ball;
most people spoke well of them; and Mr. Preston had an animal's
instinctive jealousy and combativeness against all popular young men.
Their "position"--poor as the Hamleys might be--was far higher than
his own in the county; and, moreover, he was agent to the great Whig
lord, whose political interests were diametrically opposed to those
of the old Tory squire. Not that Lord Cumnor troubled himself much
about his political interests. His family had obtained property and
title from the Whigs at the time of the Hanoverian succession; and
so, traditionally, he was a Whig, and had belonged in his youth to
Whig clubs, where he had lost considerable sums of money to Whig
gamblers. All this was satisfactory and consistent enough. And if
Lord Hollingford had not been returned for the county on the Whig
interest--as his father had been before him, until he had succeeded
to the title--it is quite probable Lord Cumnor would have considered
the British constitution in danger, and the patriotism of his
ancestors ungratefully ignored. But, excepting at elections, he had
no notion of making Whig and Tory a party cry. He had lived too much
in London, and was of too sociable a nature, to exclude any man who
jumped with his humour from the hospitality he was always ready to
offer, be the agreeable acquaintance Whig, Tory, or Radical. But in
the county of which he was lord-lieutenant, the old party distinction
was still a shibboleth by which men were tested as to their fitness
for social intercourse, as well as on the hustings. If by any chance
a Whig found himself at a Tory dinner-table--or vice versë--the food
was hard of digestion, and wine and viands were criticized rather
than enjoyed. A marriage between the young people of the separate
parties was almost as unheard-of and prohibited an alliance as that
of Romeo and Juliet's. And of course Mr. Preston was not a man in
whose breast such prejudices would die away. They were an excitement
to him for one thing, and called out all his talent for intrigue on
behalf of the party to which he was allied. Moreover, he considered
it as loyalty to his employer to "scatter his enemies" by any means
in his power. He had always hated and despised the Tories in general;
and after that interview on the marshy common in front of Silas's
cottage, he hated the Hamleys and Roger especially, with a very
choice and particular hatred. "That prig," as hereafter he always
designated Roger--"he shall pay for it yet," he said to himself by
way of consolation, after the father and son had left him. "What a
lout it is!"--watching the receding figures, "The old chap has twice
as much spunk," as the Squire tugged at his bridle reins. "The old
mare could make her way better without being led, my fine fellow. But
I see through your dodge. You're afraid of your old father turning
back and getting into another rage. Position indeed! a beggarly
squire--a man who did turn off his men just before winter, to rot
or starve, for all he cared--it's just like a brutal old Tory." And,
under the cover of sympathy with the dismissed labourers, Mr. Preston
indulged his own private pique very pleasantly.

Mr. Preston had many causes for rejoicing: he might have forgotten
this discomfiture, as he chose to feel it, in the remembrance of
an increase of income, and in the popularity he enjoyed in his new
abode. All Hollingford came forward to do the earl's new agent
honour. Mr. Sheepshanks had been a crabbed, crusty old bachelor,
frequenting inn-parlours on market days, not unwilling to give
dinners to three or four chosen friends and familiars, with whom,
in return, he dined from time to time, and with whom, also, he kept
up an amicable rivalry in the matter of wines. But he "did not
appreciate female society," as Miss Browning elegantly worded his
unwillingness to accept the invitations of the Hollingford ladies.
He was even unrefined enough to speak of these invitations to his
intimate friends aforesaid as "those old women's worrying," but, of
course, they never heard of this. Little quarter-of-sheet notes,
without any envelopes--that invention was unknown in those days--but
sealed in the corners when folded up instead of gummed as they are
fastened at present--occasionally passed between Mr. Sheepshanks
and the Miss Brownings, Mrs. Goodenough or others. From the
first-mentioned ladies the form ran as follows:--"Miss Browning
and her sister, Miss Phoebe Browning, present their respectful
compliments to Mr. Sheepshanks, and beg to inform him that a few
friends have kindly consented to favour them with their company at
tea on Thursday next. Miss Browning and Miss Phoebe will take it
very kindly if Mr. Sheepshanks will join their little circle."

Now for Mrs. Goodenough.

"Mrs. Goodenough's respects to Mr. Sheepshanks, and hopes he is in
good health. She would be very glad if he would favour her with his
company to tea on Monday. My daughter, in Combermere, has sent me a
couple of guinea-fowls, and Mrs. Goodenough hopes Mr. Sheepshanks
will stay and take a bit of supper."

No need for the dates of the days of the month. The good ladies would
have thought that the world was coming to an end if the invitation
had been sent out a week before the party therein named. But not even
guinea-fowls for supper could tempt Mr. Sheepshanks. He remembered
the made-wines he had tasted in former days at Hollingford parties,
and shuddered. Bread-and-cheese, with a glass of bitter-beer, or a
little brandy-and-water, partaken of in his old clothes (which had
worn into shapes of loose comfort, and smelt strongly of tobacco),
he liked better than roast guinea-fowl and birch-wine, even without
throwing into the balance the stiff uneasy coat, and the tight
neckcloth and tighter shoes. So the ex-agent had been seldom, if
ever, seen at the Hollingford tea-parties. He might have had his form
of refusal stereotyped, it was so invariably the same.

"Mr. Sheepshanks' duty to Miss Browning and her sister" (to Mrs.
Goodenough, or to others, as the case might be). "Business of
importance prevents him from availing himself of their polite
invitation; for which he begs to return his best thanks."

But now that Mr. Preston had succeeded, and come to live in
Hollingford, things were changed.

He accepted every civility right and left, and won golden opinions
accordingly. Parties were made in his honour, "just as if he had been
a bride," Miss Phoebe Browning said; and to all of them he went.

"What's the man after?" said Mr. Sheepshanks to himself, when he
heard of his successor's affability, and sociability, and amiability,
and a variety of other agreeable "ilities," from the friends whom the
old steward still retained at Hollingford. "Preston's not a man to
put himself out for nothing. He's deep. He'll be after something
solider than popularity."

The sagacious old bachelor was right. Mr. Preston was "after"
something more than mere popularity. He went wherever he had a chance
of meeting Cynthia Kirkpatrick.

It might be that Molly's spirits were more depressed at this time
than they were in general; or that Cynthia was exultant, unawares to
herself, in the amount of attention and admiration she was receiving
from Roger by day, from Mr. Preston in the evening, but the two girls
seemed to have parted company in cheerfulness. Molly was always
gentle, but very grave and silent. Cynthia, on the contrary, was
merry, full of pretty mockeries, and hardly ever silent. When first
she came to Hollingford one of her great charms had been that she
was such a gracious listener; now her excitement, by whatever caused,
made her too restless to hold her tongue; yet what she said was too
pretty, too witty, not to be a winning and sparkling interruption,
eagerly welcomed by those who were under her sway. Mr. Gibson was
the only one who observed this change, and reasoned upon it. "She's
in a mental fever of some kind," thought he to himself. "She's very
fascinating, but I don't quite understand her."

If Molly had not been so entirely loyal to her friend, she might have
thought this constant brilliancy a little tiresome when brought into
every-day life; it was not the sunshiny rest of a placid lake, it was
rather the glitter of the pieces of a broken mirror, which confuses
and bewilders. Cynthia would not talk quietly about anything now;
subjects of thought or conversation seemed to have lost their
relative value. There were exceptions to this mood of hers, when she
sank into deep fits of silence, that would have been gloomy had it
not been for the never varying sweetness of her temper. If there was
a little kindness to be done to either Mr. Gibson or Molly, Cynthia
was just as ready as ever to do it; nor did she refuse to do anything
her mother wished, however fidgety might be the humour that prompted
the wish. But in this latter case Cynthia's eyes were not quickened
by her heart.

Molly was dejected, she knew not why. Cynthia had drifted a little
apart; that was not it. Her stepmother had whimsical moods; and if
Cynthia displeased her, she would oppress Molly with small kindnesses
and pseudo-affection. Or else everything was wrong, the world was
out of joint, and Molly had failed in her mission to set it right,
and was to be blamed accordingly. But Molly was of too steady a
disposition to be much moved by the changeableness of an unreasonable
person. She might be annoyed, or irritated, but she was not
depressed. That was not it. The real cause was certainly this. As
long as Roger was drawn to Cynthia, and sought her of his own accord,
it had been a sore pain and bewilderment to Molly's heart; but it was
a straightforward attraction, and one which Molly acknowledged, in
her humility and great power of loving, to be the most natural thing
in the world. She would look at Cynthia's beauty and grace, and feel
as if no one could resist it. And when she witnessed all the small
signs of honest devotion which Roger was at no pains to conceal, she
thought, with a sigh, that surely no girl could help relinquishing
her heart to such tender, strong keeping as Roger's character
ensured. She would have been willing to cut off her right hand,
if need were, to forward his attachment to Cynthia; and the
self-sacrifice would have added a strange zest to a happy crisis. She
was indignant at what she considered to be Mrs. Gibson's obtuseness
to so much goodness and worth; and when she called Roger "a country
lout," or any other depreciative epithet, Molly would pinch herself
in order to keep silent. But after all, those were peaceful days
compared to the present, when she, seeing the wrong side of the
tapestry, after the wont of those who dwell in the same house with
a plotter, became aware that Mrs. Gibson had totally changed her
behaviour to Roger, from some cause unknown to Molly.

But he was always exactly the same; "steady as old Time," as Mrs.
Gibson called him, with her usual originality; "a rock of strength,
under whose very shadow there is rest," as Mrs. Hamley had once
spoken of him. So the cause of Mrs. Gibson's altered manner lay not
in him. Yet now he was sure of a welcome, let him come at any hour he
would. He was playfully reproved for having taken Mrs. Gibson's words
too literally, and for never coming before lunch. But he said he
considered her reasons for such words to be valid, and should respect
them. And this was done out of his simplicity, and from no tinge of
malice. Then in their family conversations at home, Mrs. Gibson was
constantly making projects for throwing Roger and Cynthia together,
with so evident a betrayal of her wish to bring about an engagement,
that Molly chafed at the net spread so evidently, and at Roger's
blindness in coming so willingly to be entrapped. She forgot his
previous willingness, his former evidences of manly fondness for the
beautiful Cynthia; she only saw plots of which he was the victim, and
Cynthia the conscious if passive bait. She felt as if she could not
have acted as Cynthia did; no, not even to gain Roger's love. Cynthia
heard and saw as much of the domestic background as she did, and yet
she submitted to the rÖle assigned to her! To be sure, this rÖle
would have been played by her unconsciously; the things prescribed
were what she would naturally have done; but because they were
prescribed--by implication only, it is true--Molly would have
resisted; have gone out, for instance, when she was expected to stay
at home; or have lingered in the garden when a long country walk was
planned. At last--for she could not help loving Cynthia, come what
would--she determined to believe that Cynthia was entirely unaware of
all; but it was with an effort that she brought herself to believe
it.

It may be all very pleasant "to sport with Amaryllis in the shade,
or with the tangles of Neżra's hair," but young men at the outset of
their independent life have many other cares in this prosaic England
to occupy their time and their thoughts. Roger was Fellow of Trinity,
to be sure; and from the outside it certainly appeared as if his
position, as long as he chose to keep unmarried, was a very easy
one. His was not a nature, however, to sink down into inglorious
ease, even had his fellowship income been at his disposal. He
looked forward to an active life; in what direction he had not yet
determined. He knew what were his talents and his tastes; and did
not wish the former to lie buried, nor the latter, which he regarded
as gifts, fitting him for some peculiar work, to be disregarded or
thwarted. He rather liked awaiting an object, secure in his own
energy to force his way to it, when once he saw it clearly. He
reserved enough of money for his own personal needs, which were
small, and for the ready furtherance of any project he might see
fit to undertake; the rest of his income was Osborne's; given and
accepted in the spirit which made the bond between these two brothers
so rarely perfect. It was only the thought of Cynthia that threw
Roger off his balance. A strong man in everything else, about her
he was as a child. He knew that he could not marry and retain
his fellowship; his intention was to hold himself loose from any
employment or profession until he had found one to his mind, so
there was no immediate prospect--no prospect for many years, indeed,
that he would be able to marry. Yet he went on seeking Cynthia's
sweet company, listening to the music of her voice, basking in her
sunshine, and feeding his passion in every possible way, just like an
unreasoning child. He knew that it was folly--and yet he did it; and
it was perhaps this that made him so sympathetic with Osborne. Roger
racked his brains about Osborne's affairs much more frequently than
Osborne troubled himself. Indeed, he had become so ailing and languid
of late, that even the Squire made only very faint objections to
his desire for frequent change of scene, though formerly he used to
grumble so much at the necessary expenditure it involved.

"After all, it doesn't cost much," the Squire said to Roger one day.
"Choose how he does it, he does it cheaply; he used to come and ask
me for twenty, where now he does it for five. But he and I have
lost each other's language, that's what we have! and my dictionary"
(only he called it "dixonary") "has all got wrong because of those
confounded debts--which he will never explain to me, or talk
about--he always holds me off at arm's length when I begin upon
it--he does, Roger--me, his old dad, as was his primest favourite of
all, when he was a little bit of a chap!"

The Squire dwelt so much upon Osborne's reserved behaviour to
himself, that brooding over this one subject perpetually he became
more morose and gloomy than ever in his manner to Osborne, resenting
the want of the confidence and affection that he thus repelled. So
much so that Roger, who desired to avoid being made the receptacle
of his father's complaints against Osborne--and Roger's passive
listening was the sedative his father always sought--had often
to have recourse to the discussion of the drainage works as a
counter-irritant. The Squire had felt Mr. Preston's speech about
the dismissal of his work-people very keenly; it fell in with the
reproaches of his own conscience, though, as he would repeat to
Roger over and over again,--"I couldn't help it--how could I?--I was
drained dry of ready money--I wish the land was drained as dry as
I am," said he, with a touch of humour that came out before he was
aware, and at which he smiled sadly enough. "What was I to do, I ask
you, Roger? I know I was in a rage--I've had a deal to make me so--and
maybe I didn't think as much about consequences as I should ha'
done, when I gave orders for 'em to be sent off; but I couldn't have
done otherwise if I'd ha' thought for a twelvemonth in cool blood.
Consequences! I hate consequences; they've always been against me;
they have. I'm so tied up I can't cut down a stick more, and that's a
'consequence' of having the property so deucedly well settled; I wish
I'd never had any ancestors. Ay, laugh, lad! it does me good to see
thee laugh a bit, after Osborne's long face, which always grows longer
at sight o' me!"

"Look here, father!" said Roger, suddenly, "I'll manage somehow about
the money for the works. You trust to me; give me two months to turn
myself in, and you shall have some money, at any rate, to begin
with."

The Squire looked at him, and his face brightened as a child's does
at the promise of a pleasure made to him by some one on whom he can
rely. He became a little graver, however, as he said,--"But how will
you get it? It's hard enough work."

"Never mind; I'll get it--a hundred or so at first--I don't yet
know how--but remember, father, I'm a senior wrangler, and a 'very
promising young writer,' as that review called me. Oh, you don't know
what a fine fellow you've got for a son! You should have read that
review to know all my wonderful merits."

"I did, Roger. I heard Gibson speaking of it, and I made him get it
for me. I should have understood it better if they could have called
the animals by their English names, and not put so much of their
French jingo into it."

"But it was an answer to an article by a French writer," pleaded
Roger.

"I'd ha' let him alone!" said the Squire, earnestly. "We had to
beat 'em, and we did it at Waterloo; but I'd not demean myself by
answering any of their lies, if I was you. But I got through the
review, for all their Latin and French--I did; and if you doubt me,
you just look at the end of the great ledger, turn it upside down,
and you'll find I've copied out all the fine words they said of you:
'careful observer,' 'strong nervous English,' 'rising philosopher.'
Oh! I can nearly say it all off by heart, for many a time when I'm
frabbed by bad debts, or Osborne's bills, or moidered with accounts,
I turn the ledger wrong way up, and smoke a pipe over it, while I
read those pieces out of the review which speak about you, lad!"




CHAPTER XXXII.

COMING EVENTS.


Roger had turned over many plans in his mind, by which he thought
that he could obtain sufficient money for the purpose he desired to
accomplish. His careful grandfather, who had been a merchant in the
city, had so tied up the few thousands he had left to his daughter,
that although, in case of her death before her husband's, the latter
might enjoy the life-interest thereof, yet, in case of both their
deaths, their second son did not succeed to the property until he was
five-and-twenty; and if he died before that age, the money that would
then have been his went to one of his cousins on the maternal side.
In short, the old merchant had taken as many precautions about his
legacy as if it had been for tens, instead of units of thousands. Of
course Roger might have slipped through all these meshes by insuring
his life until the specified age; and, probably, if he had consulted
any lawyer, this course would have been suggested to him. But he
disliked taking any one into his confidence on the subject of
his father's want of ready money. He had obtained a copy of his
grandfather's will at Doctors' Commons, and he imagined that all the
contingencies involved in it would be patent to the light of nature
and common sense. He was a little mistaken in this, but not the less
resolved that money in some way he would have in order to fulfil his
promise to his father, and for the ulterior purpose of giving the
squire some daily interest to distract his thoughts from the regrets
and cares that were almost weakening his mind. It was "Roger Hamley,
senior wrangler and Fellow of Trinity, to the highest bidder, no
matter what honest employment," and presently it came down to "any
bidder at all."

Another perplexity and distress at this time weighed upon Roger.
Osborne, heir to the estate, was going to have a child. The Hamley
property was entailed on "heirs male born in lawful wedlock." Was the
"wedlock" lawful? Osborne never seemed to doubt that it was--never
seemed, in fact, to think twice about it. And if he, the husband, did
not, how much less did AimÄe, the trustful wife? Yet who could tell
how much misery any shadows of illegality might cast into the future?
One evening Roger, sitting by the languid, careless, dilettante
Osborne, began to question him as to the details of the marriage.
Osborne knew instinctively at what Roger was aiming. It was not that
he did not desire perfect legality in justice to his wife; it was
that he was so indisposed at the time that he hated to be bothered.
It was something like the refrain of Gray's Scandinavian Prophetess:
"Leave me, leave me to repose."

"But do try and tell me how you managed it."

"How tiresome you are, Roger!" put in Osborne.

"Well, I daresay I am. Go on!"

"I've told you Morrison married us. You remember old Morrison at
Trinity?"

"Yes; as good and blunder-headed a fellow as ever lived."

"Well, he's taken orders; and the examination for priest's orders
fatigued him so much that he got his father to give him a hundred or
two for a tour on the Continent. He meant to get to Rome, because he
heard that there were such pleasant winters there. So he turned up at
Metz in August."

"I don't see why."

"No more did he. He never was great in geography, you know; and
somehow he thought that Metz, pronounced French fashion, must be on
the road to Rome. Some one had told him so in fun. However, it was
very well for me that I met with him there, for I was determined to
be married, and that without loss of time."

"But AimÄe is a Catholic?"

"That's true! but you see I am not. You don't suppose I would do her
any wrong, Roger?" asked Osborne, sitting up in his lounging-chair,
and speaking rather indignantly to Roger, his face suddenly flushing
red.

"No! I'm sure you would not mean it; but, you see, there's a child
coming, and this estate is entailed on 'heirs-male.' Now, I want
to know if the marriage is legal or not? and it seems to me it's a
ticklish question."

"Oh!" said Osborne, falling back into repose, "if that's all, I
suppose you're next heir-male, and I can trust you as I can myself.
You know my marriage is _bonë fide_ in intention, and I believe
it to be legal in fact. We went over to Strasbourg; AimÄe picked
up a friend--a good middle-aged Frenchwoman--who served half
as bridesmaid, half as chaperone, and then we went before the
mayor--prÄfet--what do you call them? I think Morrison rather enjoyed
the spree. I signed all manner of papers in the prefecture; I did not
read them over, for fear lest I could not sign them conscientiously.
It was the safest plan. AimÄe kept trembling so I thought she would
faint; and then we went off to the nearest English chaplaincy,
Carlsruhe, and the chaplain was away, so Morrison easily got the loan
of the chapel, and we were married the next day."

"But surely some registration or certificate was necessary?"

"Morrison said he would undertake all those forms; and he ought to
know his own business. I know I tipped him pretty well for the job."

"You must be married again," said Roger, after a pause, "and
that before the child is born. Have you got a certificate of the
marriage?"

"I daresay Morrison has got it somewhere. But I believe I'm legally
married according to the laws both of England and France; I really
do, old fellow. I've got the prÄfet's papers somewhere."

"Never mind! you shall be married again in England. AimÄe goes to the
Roman Catholic chapel at Prestham, doesn't she?"

"Yes. She is so good I wouldn't disturb her in her religion for the
world."

"Then you shall be married both there and at the church of the parish
in which she lives as well," said Roger, decidedly.

"It's a great deal of trouble, unnecessary trouble, and unnecessary
expense, I should say," said Osborne. "Why can't you leave well
alone? Neither AimÄe nor I are of the sort of stuff to turn
scoundrels and deny the legality of our marriage; and if the child
is a boy and my father dies, and I die, why I'm sure you'll do him
justice, as sure as I am of myself, old fellow!"

"But if I die into the bargain? Make a hecatomb of the present
Hamleys all at once, while you are about it. Who succeeds as
heir-male?"

Osborne thought for a moment. "One of the Irish Hamleys, I suppose.
I fancy they are needy chaps. Perhaps you're right. But what need to
have such gloomy forebodings?"

"The law makes one have foresight in such affairs," said Roger. "So
I'll go down to AimÄe next week when I'm in town, and I'll make all
necessary arrangements before you come. I think you'll be happier if
it is all done."

"I shall be happier if I've a chance of seeing the little woman, that
I grant you. But what is taking you up to town? I wish I'd money to
run about like you, instead of being shut up for ever in this dull
old house."

Osborne was apt occasionally to contrast his position with Roger's
in a tone of complaint, forgetting that both were the results of
character, and also that out of his income Roger gave up so large
a portion for the maintenance of his brother's wife. But if this
ungenerous thought of Osborne's had been set clearly before his
conscience, he would have smote his breast and cried "Mea culpa" with
the best of them; it was only that he was too indolent to keep an
unassisted conscience.

"I shouldn't have thought of going up," said Roger, reddening as if
he had been accused of spending another's money instead of his own,
"if I hadn't had to go up on business. Lord Hollingford has written
for me; he knows my great wish for employment, and has heard of
something which he considers suitable; there's his letter if you care
to read it. But it does not tell anything definitely."

Osborne read the letter and returned it to Roger. After a moment or
two of silence he said,--"Why do you want money? Are we taking too
much from you? It's a great shame of me; but what can I do? Only
suggest a career for me, and I'll follow it to-morrow." He spoke as
if Roger had been reproaching him.

"My dear fellow, don't get those notions into your head! I must
do something for myself sometimes, and I've been on the look-out.
Besides, I want my father to go on with his drainage; it would do
good both to his health and his spirits. If I can advance any part of
the money requisite, he and you shall pay me interest until you can
return the capital."

"Roger, you're the providence of the family," exclaimed Osborne,
suddenly struck by admiration at his brother's conduct, and
forgetting to contrast it with his own.

So Roger went up to London and Osborne followed him, and for two or
three weeks the Gibsons saw nothing of the brothers. But as wave
succeeds to wave, so interest succeeds to interest. "The family,"
as they were called, came down for their autumn sojourn at the
Towers, and again the house was full of visitors, and the Towers'
servants, and carriages, and liveries were seen in the two streets of
Hollingford, just as they might have been seen for scores of autumns
past.

So runs the round of life from day to day. Mrs. Gibson found the
chances of intercourse with the Towers rather more personally
exciting than Roger's visits, or the rarer calls of Osborne Hamley.
Cynthia had an old antipathy to the great family who had made so much
of her mother and so little of her; and whom she considered as in
some measure the cause why she had seen so little of her mother in
the days when the little girl had craved for love and found none.
Moreover, Cynthia missed her slave, although she did not care for
Roger one thousandth part of what he did for her; yet she had found
it not unpleasant to have a man whom she thoroughly respected, and
whom men in general respected, the subject of her eye, the glad
ministrant to each scarce-spoken wish, a person in whose sight
all her words were pearls or diamonds, all her actions heavenly
graciousness, and in whose thoughts she reigned supreme. She had
no modest unconsciousness about her; and yet she was not vain.
She knew of all this worship; and when from circumstances she no
longer received it, she missed it. The Earl and the Countess, Lord
Hollingford and Lady Harriet, lords and ladies in general, liveries,
dresses, bags of game, and rumours of riding parties, were as nothing
to her compared to Roger's absence. And yet she did not love him.
No, she did not love him. Molly knew that Cynthia did not love him.
Molly grew angry with her many and many a time as the conviction of
this fact was forced upon her. Molly did not know her own feelings;
Roger had no overwhelming interest in what they might be; while his
very life-breath seemed to depend on what Cynthia felt and thought.
Therefore Molly had keen insight into her "sister's" heart; and she
knew that Cynthia did not love Roger. Molly could have cried with
passionate regret at the thought of the unvalued treasure lying at
Cynthia's feet; and it would have been a merely unselfish regret.
It was the old fervid tenderness: "Do not wish for the moon, O my
darling, for I cannot give it thee." Cynthia's love was the moon
Roger yearned for; and Molly saw that it was far away and out of
reach, else would she have strained her heart-cords to give it to
Roger.

"I am his sister," she would say to herself. "That old bond is not
done away with, though he is too much absorbed by Cynthia to speak
about it just now. His mother called me 'Fanny;' it was almost like
an adoption. I must wait and watch, and see if I can do anything for
my brother."

One day Lady Harriet came to call on the Gibsons, or rather on Mrs.
Gibson, for the latter retained her old jealousy if any one else
in Hollingford was supposed to be on intimate terms at the great
house, or in the least acquainted with their plans. Mr. Gibson might
possibly know as much, but then he was professionally bound to
secrecy. Out of the house she considered Mr. Preston as her rival,
and he was aware that she did so, and delighted in teasing her by
affecting a knowledge of family plans and details of affairs of which
she was ignorant. Indoors she was jealous of the fancy Lady Harriet
had evidently taken for her step-daughter, and she contrived to place
quiet obstacles in the way of a too frequent intercourse between the
two. These obstacles were not unlike the shield of the knight in
the old story; only instead of the two sides presented to the two
travellers approaching it from opposite quarters, one of which was
silver, and one of which was gold, Lady Harriet saw the smooth and
shining yellow radiance, while poor Molly only perceived a dull and
heavy lead. To Lady Harriet it was "Molly is gone out; she will be so
sorry to miss you, but she was obliged to go to see some old friends
of her mother's whom she ought not to neglect; as I said to her,
constancy is everything. It is Sterne, I think, who says, 'Thine own
and thy mother's friends forsake not.' But, dear Lady Harriet, you'll
stop till she comes home, won't you? I know how fond you are of her;
in fact" (with a little surface playfulness) "I sometimes say you
come more to see her than your poor old Clare."

To Molly it had previously been,--

"Lady Harriet is coming here this morning. I can't have any one else
coming in. Tell Maria to say I'm not at home. Lady Harriet has always
so much to tell me. Dear Lady Harriet! I've known all her secrets
since she was twelve years old. You two girls must keep out of the
way. Of course she'll ask for you, out of common civility; but
you would only interrupt us if you came in, as you did the other
day;"--now addressing Molly--"I hardly like to say so, but I thought
it was very forward."

"Maria told me she had asked for me," put in Molly, simply.

"Very forward indeed!" continued Mrs. Gibson, taking no further
notice of the interruption, except to strengthen the words to which
Molly's little speech had been intended as a correction.

"I think this time I must secure her ladyship from the chances of
such an intrusion, by taking care that you are out of the house,
Molly. You had better go to the Holly Farm, and speak about those
damsons I ordered, and which have never been sent."

"I'll go," said Cynthia. "It's far too long a walk for Molly; she's
had a bad cold, and isn't as strong as she was a fortnight ago. I
delight in long walks. If you want Molly out of the way, mamma, send
her to the Miss Brownings'--they are always glad to see her."

"I never said I wanted Molly out of the way, Cynthia," replied Mrs.
Gibson. "You always put things in such an exaggerated--I should
almost say, so coarse a manner. I am sure, Molly, my love, you
could never have so misunderstood me; it is only on Lady Harriet's
account."

"I don't think I can walk as far as the Holly Farm; papa would take
the message; Cynthia need not go."

"Well! I'm the last person in the world to tax any one's strength;
I'd sooner never see damson preserve again. Suppose you do go and see
Miss Browning; you can pay her a nice long call, you know she likes
that; and ask after Miss Phoebe's cold from me, you know. They were
friends of your mother's, my dear, and I would not have you break off
old friendships for the world. 'Constancy above everything' is my
motto, as you know, and the memory of the dead ought always to be
cherished."

"Now, mamma, where am I to go?" asked Cynthia. "Though Lady Harriet
doesn't care for me as much as she does for Molly--indeed, quite the
contrary I should say--yet she might ask after me, and I had better
be safely out of the way."

"True!" said Mrs. Gibson, meditatively, yet unconscious of any satire
in Cynthia's speech.

"She is much less likely to ask for you, my dear: I almost think
you might remain in the house, or you might go to the Holly Farm;
I really do want the damsons; or you might stay here in the
dining-room, you know, so as to be ready to arrange lunch prettily,
if she does take a fancy to stay for it. She is very fanciful,
is dear Lady Harriet! I would not like her to think we made any
difference in our meals because she stayed. 'Simple elegance,' as I
tell her, 'always is what we aim at.' But still you could put out the
best service, and arrange some flowers, and ask cook what there is
for dinner that she could send us for lunch, and make it all look
pretty, and impromptu, and natural. I think you had better stay at
home, Cynthia, and then you could fetch Molly from Miss Brownings' in
the afternoon, you know, and you two could take a walk together."

"After Lady Harriet was fairly gone! I understand, mamma. Off with
you, Molly. Make haste, or Lady Harriet may come and ask for you as
well as mamma. I'll take care and forget where you are going to, so
that no one shall learn from me where you are, and I'll answer for
mamma's loss of memory."

"Child! what nonsense you talk; you quite confuse me with being so
silly," said Mrs. Gibson, fluttered and annoyed as she usually was
with the Lilliputian darts Cynthia flung at her. She had recourse to
her accustomed feckless piece of retaliation--bestowing some favour
on Molly; and this did not hurt Cynthia one whit.

"Molly, darling, there's a very cold wind, though it looks so fine.
You had better put on my Indian shawl; and it will look so pretty,
too, on your grey gown--scarlet and grey; it's not everybody I would
lend it to, but you're so careful."

"Thank you," said Molly: and she left Mrs. Gibson in careless
uncertainty as to whether her offer would be accepted or not.

Lady Harriet was sorry to miss Molly, as she was fond of the
girl; but as she perfectly agreed with Mrs. Gibson's truism about
"constancy" and "old friends," she saw no occasion for saying any
more about the affair, but sat down in a little low chair with her
feet on the fender. This said fender was made of bright, bright
steel, and was strictly tabooed to all household and plebeian feet;
indeed the position, if they assumed it, was considered low-bred and
vulgar.

"That's right, dear Lady Harriet! you can't think what a pleasure it
is to me to welcome you at my own fireside, into my humble home."

"Humble! now, Clare, that's a little bit of nonsense, begging your
pardon. I don't call this pretty little drawing-room a bit of a
'humble home.' It's as full of comforts, and of pretty things too, as
any room of its size can be."

"Ah! how small you must feel it! even I had to reconcile myself to it
at first."

"Well! perhaps your schoolroom was larger, but remember how bare it
was, how empty of anything but deal tables, and forms, and mats. Oh,
indeed, Clare, I quite agree with mamma, who always says you have
done very well for yourself; and Mr. Gibson too! What an agreeable,
well-informed man!"

"Yes, he is," said his wife, slowly, as if she did not like to
relinquish her rÖle of a victim to circumstances quite immediately.
"He is very agreeable, very; only we see so little of him; and of
course he comes home tired and hungry, and not inclined to talk to
his own family, and apt to go to sleep."

"Come, come!" said Lady Harriet, "I'm going to have my turn now.
We've had the complaint of a doctor's wife, now hear the moans of a
peer's daughter. Our house is so overrun with visitors! and literally
to-day I have come to you for a little solitude."

"Solitude!" exclaimed Mrs. Gibson. "Would you rather be alone?"
slightly aggrieved.

"No, you dear silly woman; my solitude requires a listener, to
whom I may say, 'How sweet is solitude!' But I am tired of the
responsibility of entertaining. Papa is so open-hearted, he asks
every friend he meets with to come and pay us a visit. Mamma is
really a great invalid, but she does not choose to give up her
reputation for good health, having always considered illness a want
of self-control. So she gets wearied and worried by a crowd of people
who are all of them open-mouthed for amusement of some kind; just
like a brood of fledglings in a nest; so I have to be parent-bird,
and pop morsels into their yellow leathery bills, to find them
swallowed down before I can think of where to find the next. Oh, it's
'entertaining' in the largest, literalist, dreariest sense of the
word. So I have told a few lies this morning, and come off here for
quietness and the comfort of complaining!"

Lady Harriet threw herself back in her chair, and yawned; Mrs. Gibson
took one of her ladyship's hands in a soft sympathizing manner, and
murmured,--

"Poor Lady Harriet!" and then she purred affectionately.

After a pause Lady Harriet started up and said--"I used to take you
as my arbiter of morals when I was a little girl. Tell me, do you
think it wrong to tell lies?"

"Oh, my dear! how can you ask such questions?--of course it is very
wrong,--very wicked indeed, I think I may say. But I know you were
only joking when you said you had told lies."

"No, indeed, I wasn't. I told as plump fat lies as you would wish
to hear. I said I 'was obliged to go into Hollingford on business,'
when the truth was there was no obligation in the matter, only an
insupportable desire of being free from my visitors for an hour or
two, and my only business was to come here, and yawn, and complain,
and lounge at my leisure. I really think I'm unhappy at having told a
story, as children express it."

"But, my dear Lady Harriet," said Mrs. Gibson, a little puzzled as to
the exact meaning of the words that were trembling on her tongue, "I
am sure you thought that you meant what you said, when you said it."

"No, I didn't," put in Lady Harriet.

"And besides, if you didn't, it was the fault of the tiresome people
who drove you into such straits--yes, it was certainly their fault,
not yours--and then you know the conventions of society--ah, what
trammels they are!"

Lady Harriet was silent for a minute or two; then she said,--"Tell
me, Clare; you've told lies sometimes, haven't you?"

"Lady Harriet! I think you might have known me better; but I know you
don't mean it, dear."

"Yes, I do. You must have told white lies, at any rate. How did you
feel after them?"

"I should have been miserable if I ever had. I should have died of
self-reproach. 'The truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth,' has always seemed to me such a fine passage. But then I have
so much that is unbending in my nature, and in our sphere of life
there are so few temptations. If we are humble, we are also simple,
and unshackled by etiquette."

"Then you blame me very much? If somebody else will blame me, I
sha'n't be so unhappy at what I said this morning."

"I am sure I never blamed you, not in my innermost heart, dear Lady
Harriet. Blame you, indeed! That would be presumption in me."

"I think I shall set up a confessor! and it sha'n't be you, Clare,
for you have always been only too indulgent to me."

After a pause she said,--"Can you give me some lunch, Clare? I don't
mean to go home till three. My 'business' will take me till then, as
the people at the Towers are duly informed."

"Certainly. I shall be delighted! but you know we are very simple in
our habits."

"Oh, I only want a little bread-and-butter, and perhaps a slice of
cold meat--you must not give yourself any trouble, Clare--perhaps you
dine now? let me sit down just like one of your family."

"Yes, you shall; I won't make any alteration;--it will be so pleasant
to have you sharing our family meal, dear Lady Harriet. But we dine
late, we only lunch now. How low the fire is getting; I really am
forgetting everything in the pleasure of this tÉte-ł-tÉte!"

So she rang twice; with great distinctness, and with a long pause
between the rings. Maria brought in coals.

But the signal was as well understood by Cynthia as the "Hall of
Apollo" was by the servants of Lucullus. The brace of partridges that
were to have been for the late dinner were instantly put down to the
fire; and the prettiest china brought out, and the table decked with
flowers and fruit, arranged with all Cynthia's usual dexterity and
taste. So that when the meal was announced, and Lady Harriet entered
the room, she could not but think her hostess's apologies had been
quite unnecessary; and be more and more convinced that Clare had
done very well for herself. Cynthia now joined the party, pretty
and elegant as she always was; but somehow she did not take Lady
Harriet's fancy; she only noticed her on account of her being her
mother's daughter. Her presence made the conversation more general,
and Lady Harriet gave out several pieces of news, none of them of any
great importance to her, but as what had been talked about by the
circle of visitors assembled at the Towers.

"Lord Hollingford ought to have been with us," she said, amongst
other things; "but he is obliged, or fancies himself obliged, which
is all the same thing, to stay in town about this Crichton legacy!"

"A legacy? To Lord Hollingford? I am so glad!"

"Don't be in a hurry to be glad! It's nothing for him but trouble.
Didn't you hear of that rich eccentric Mr. Crichton, who died
some time ago, and--fired by the example of Lord Bridgewater,
I suppose--left a sum of money in the hands of trustees, of
whom my brother is one, to send out a man with a thousand fine
qualifications, to make a scientific voyage, with a view to bringing
back specimens of the fauna of distant lands, and so forming the
nucleus of a museum which is to be called the Crichton Museum, and so
perpetuate the founder's name. Such various forms does man's vanity
take! Sometimes it stimulates philanthropy; sometimes a love of
science!"

"It seems to me a very laudable and useful object, I am sure," said
Mrs. Gibson, safely.

"I daresay it is, taking it from the public-good view. But it's
rather tiresome to us privately, for it keeps Hollingford in town--or
between it and Cambridge--and each place as dull and empty as can be,
just when we want him down at the Towers. The thing ought to have
been decided long ago, and there's some danger of the legacy lapsing.
The two other trustees have run away to the Continent, feeling, as
they say, the utmost confidence in him, but in reality shirking their
responsibilities. However, I believe he likes it, so I ought not to
grumble. He thinks he is going to be very successful in the choice of
his man--and he belongs to this county, too,--young Hamley of Hamley,
if he can only get his college to let him go, for he is a Fellow of
Trinity, senior wrangler or something; and they're not so foolish as
to send their crack man to be eaten up by lions and tigers!"

"It must be Roger Hamley!" exclaimed Cynthia, her eyes brightening,
and her cheeks flushing.

"He's not the eldest son; he can scarcely be called Hamley of
Hamley!" said Mrs. Gibson.

"Hollingford's man is a Fellow of Trinity, as I said before."

"Then it is Mr. Roger Hamley," said Cynthia; "and he's up in London
about some business! What news for Molly when she comes home!"

"Why, what has Molly to do with it?" asked Lady Harriet. "Is--?" and
she looked into Mrs. Gibson's face for an answer. Mrs. Gibson in
reply gave an intelligent and very expressive glance at Cynthia, who
however did not perceive it.

"Oh, no! not at all,"--and Mrs. Gibson nodded a little at her
daughter, as much as to say, "If any one, that."

Lady Harriet began to look at the pretty Miss Kirkpatrick with fresh
interest; her brother had spoken in such a manner of this young
Mr. Hamley that every one connected with the phoenix was worthy of
observation. Then, as if the mention of Molly's name had brought her
afresh into her mind, Lady Harriet said,--"And where is Molly all
this time? I should like to see my little mentor. I hear she is very
much grown since those days."

"Oh! when she once gets gossiping with the Miss Brownings, she never
knows when to come home," said Mrs. Gibson.

"The Miss Brownings? Oh! I'm so glad you named them! I'm very fond of
them. Pecksy and Flapsy; I may call them so in Molly's absence. I'll
go and see them before I go home, and then perhaps I shall see my
dear little Molly too. Do you know, Clare, I've quite taken a fancy
to that girl!"

So Mrs. Gibson, after all her precautions, had to submit to Lady
Harriet's leaving her half-an-hour earlier than she otherwise would
have done in order to "make herself common" (as Mrs. Gibson expressed
it) by calling on the Miss Brownings.

But Molly had left before Lady Harriet arrived.

Molly went the long walk to the Holly Farm, to order the damsons,
out of a kind of penitence. She had felt conscious of anger at being
sent out of the house by such a palpable manoeuvre as that which
her stepmother had employed. Of course she did not meet Cynthia, so
she went alone along the pretty lanes, with grassy sides and high
hedge-banks not at all in the style of modern agriculture. At first
she made herself uncomfortable with questioning herself as to how
far it was right to leave unnoticed the small domestic failings--the
webs, the distortions of truth which had prevailed in their household
ever since her father's second marriage. She knew that very often
she longed to protest, but did not do it, from the desire of sparing
her father any discord; and she saw by his face that he, too, was
occasionally aware of certain things that gave him pain, as showing
that his wife's standard of conduct was not as high as he would have
liked. It was a wonder to Molly whether this silence was right or
wrong. With a girl's want of toleration, and want of experience to
teach her the force of circumstances, and of temptation, she had
often been on the point of telling her stepmother some forcible home
truths. But, possibly, her father's example of silence, and often
some piece of kindness on Mrs. Gibson's part (for after her way, and
when in a good temper, she was very kind to Molly), made her hold her
tongue.

That night at dinner, Mrs. Gibson recounted the conversation between
herself and Lady Harriet, giving it a very strong individual
colouring, as was her wont, and telling nearly the whole of what had
passed, although implying that there was a great deal said which was
so purely confidential, that she was bound in honour not to repeat
it. Her three auditors listened to her without interrupting her
much--indeed, without bestowing extreme attention on what she was
saying, until she came to the fact of Lord Hollingford's absence in
London, and the reason for it.

"Roger Hamley going off on a scientific expedition!" exclaimed Mr.
Gibson, suddenly awakened into vivacity.

"Yes. At least it is not settled finally; but as Lord Hollingford
is the only trustee who takes any interest--and being Lord Cumnor's
son--it is next to certain."

"I think I must have a voice in the matter," said Mr. Gibson; and he
relapsed into silence, keeping his ears open, however, henceforward.

"How long will he be away?" asked Cynthia. "We shall miss him sadly."

Molly's lips formed an acquiescing "yes" to this remark, but no sound
was heard. There was a buzzing in her ears as if the others were
going on with the conversation, but the words they uttered seemed
indistinct and blurred; they were merely conjectures, and did not
interfere with the one great piece of news. To the rest of the party
she appeared to be eating her dinner as usual, and, if she were
silent, there was one listener the more to Mrs. Gibson's stream of
prattle, and Mr. Gibson's and Cynthia's remarks.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

BRIGHTENING PROSPECTS.


[Illustration (untitled)]

It was a day or two afterwards, that Mr. Gibson made time to ride
round by Hamley, desirous to learn more exact particulars of this
scheme for Roger than he could obtain from any extraneous source, and
rather puzzled to know whether he should interfere in the project or
not. The state of the case was this:--Osborne's symptoms were, in Mr.
Gibson's opinion, signs of his having a fatal disease. Dr. Nicholls
had differed from him on this head, and Mr. Gibson knew that the old
physician had had long experience, and was considered very skilful
in the profession. Still he believed that he himself was right, and,
if so, the complaint was one which might continue for years in the
same state as at present, or might end the young man's life in an
hour--a minute. Supposing that Mr. Gibson was right, would it be well
for Roger to be away where no sudden calls for his presence could
reach him--away for two years? Yet if the affair was concluded, the
interference of a medical man might accelerate the very evil to be
feared; and after all, Dr. Nicholls might be right, and the symptoms
might proceed from some other cause. Might? Yes. Probably did? No.
Mr. Gibson could not bring himself to say "yes" to this latter form
of sentence. So he rode on, meditating; his reins slack, his head
a little bent. It was one of those still and lovely autumn days
when the red and yellow leaves are hanging-pegs to dewy, brilliant
gossamer-webs; when the hedges are full of trailing brambles, loaded
with ripe blackberries; when the air is full of the farewell whistles
and pipes of birds, clear and short--not the long full-throated
warbles of spring; when the whirr of the partridge's wings is heard
in the stubble-fields, as the sharp hoof-blows fall on the paved
lanes; when here and there a leaf floats and flutters down to the
ground, although there is not a single breath of wind. The country
surgeon felt the beauty of the seasons perhaps more than most men.
He saw more of it by day, by night, in storm and sunshine, or in the
still, soft, cloudy weather. He never spoke about what he felt on
the subject; indeed, he did not put his feelings into words, even to
himself. But if his mood ever approached to the sentimental, it was
on such days as this. He rode into the stable-yard, gave his horse to
a man, and went into the house by a side entrance. In the passage he
met the Squire.

"That's capital, Gibson! what good wind blew you here? You'll have
some lunch? it's on the table, I only just this minute left the
room." And he kept shaking Mr. Gibson's hand all the time till he had
placed him, nothing loth, at the well-covered dining-table.

"What's this I hear about Roger?" said Mr. Gibson, plunging at once
into the subject.

"Aha! so you've heard, have you? It's famous, isn't it? He's a boy to
be proud of, is old Roger. Steady Roger; we used to think him slow,
but it seems to me that slow and sure wins the race. But tell me;
what have you heard? how much is known? Nay, you must have a glass
full. It's old ale, such as we don't brew now-a-days; it's as old
as Osborne. We brewed it that autumn, and we called it the young
squire's ale. I thought to have tapped it on his marriage, but I
don't know when that will come to pass, so we've tapped it now in
Roger's honour."

The old squire had evidently been enjoying the young squire's ale
to the verge of prudence. It was indeed as he said, "as strong as
brandy," and Mr. Gibson had to sip it very carefully as he ate his
cold roast beef.

"Well! and what have you heard? There's a deal to hear, and all good
news, though I shall miss the lad, I know that."

"I did not know it was settled; I only heard that it was in
progress."

"Well, it was only in progress, as you call it, till last Tuesday.
He never let me know anything about it, though; he says he thought I
might be fidgety with thinking of the pros and cons. So I never knew
a word on't till I had a letter from my Lord Hollingford--where is
it?" pulling out a great black leathern receptacle for all manner of
papers. And putting on his spectacles, he read aloud their headings.

"'Measurement of timber, new railings,' 'drench for cows, from Farmer
Hayes,' 'Dobson's accounts,'--'um 'um--here it is. Now read that
letter," handing it to Mr. Gibson.

It was a manly, feeling, sensible letter, explaining to the old
father in very simple language the services which were demanded
by the terms of the will to which he and two or three others were
trustees; the liberal allowance for expenses, the still more liberal
reward for performance, which had tempted several men of considerable
renown to offer themselves as candidates for the appointment. Lord
Hollingford then went on to say that, having seen a good deal of
Roger lately, since the publication of his article in reply to the
French osteologist, he had had reason to think that in him the
trustees would find united the various qualities required in a
greater measure than in any of the applicants who had at that time
presented themselves. Roger had deep interest in the subject; much
acquired knowledge, and at the same time, great natural powers of
comparison, and classification of facts; he had shown himself to be
an observer of a fine and accurate kind; he was of the right age, in
the very prime of health and strength, and unshackled by any family
ties. Here Mr. Gibson paused for consideration. He hardly cared to
ascertain by what steps the result had been arrived at--he already
knew what that result was; but his mind was again arrested as his eye
caught on the remuneration offered, which was indeed most liberal;
and then he read with attention the high praise bestowed on the
son in this letter to the father. The Squire had been watching Mr.
Gibson--waiting till he came to this part--and he rubbed his hands
together as he said,--

"Ay! you've come to it at last. It's the best part of the whole,
isn't it? God bless the boy! and from a Whig, mind you, which makes
it the more handsome. And there's more to come still. I say, Gibson,
I think my luck is turning at last," passing him on yet another
letter to read. "That only came this morning; but I've acted on it
already, I sent for the foreman of the drainage works at once, I did;
and to-morrow, please God, they'll be at work again."

Mr. Gibson read the second letter, from Roger. To a certain degree
it was a modest repetition of what Lord Hollingford had said, with
an explanation of how he had come to take so decided a step in life
without consulting his father. He did not wish him to be in suspense
for one reason. Another was that he felt, as no one else could feel
for him, that by accepting this offer, he entered upon the kind of
life for which he knew himself to be most fitted. And then he merged
the whole into business. He said that he knew well the suffering his
father had gone through when he had had to give up his drainage works
for want of money; that he, Roger, had been enabled at once to raise
money upon the remuneration he was to receive on the accomplishment
of his two years' work; and that he had also insured his life, in
order to provide for the repayment of the money he had raised, in
case he did not live to return to England. He said that the sum he
had borrowed on this security would at once be forwarded to his
father.

Mr. Gibson laid down the letter without speaking a word for some
time; then he said,--"He'll have to pay a pretty sum for insuring his
life beyond seas."

"He's got his Fellowship money," said the Squire, a little depressed
at Mr. Gibson's remark.

"Yes; that's true. And he's a strong young fellow, as I know."

"I wish I could tell his mother," said the Squire in an under-tone.

"It seems all settled now," said Mr. Gibson, more in reply to his own
thoughts than to the Squire's remark.

"Yes!" said the Squire; "and they're not going to let the grass grow
under his feet. He's to be off as soon as he can get his scientific
traps ready. I almost wish he wasn't to go. You don't seem quite to
like it, doctor?"

"Yes, I do," said Mr. Gibson in a more cheerful tone than before. "It
can't be helped now without doing a mischief," thought he to himself.
"Why, Squire, I think it a great honour to have such a son. I envy
you, that's what I do. Here's a lad of three or four and twenty
distinguishing himself in more ways than one, and as simple and
affectionate at home as any fellow need to be--not a bit set up."

"Ay, ay; he's twice as much a son to me as Osborne, who has been all
his life set up on nothing at all, as one may say."

"Come, Squire, I mustn't hear anything against Osborne; we may praise
one, without hitting at the other. Osborne hasn't had the strong
health which has enabled Roger to work as he has done. I met a man
who knew his tutor at Trinity the other day, and of course we began
cracking about Roger--it's not every day that one can reckon a senior
wrangler amongst one's friends, and I'm nearly as proud of the lad
as you are. This Mr. Mason told me the tutor said that only half of
Roger's success was owing to his mental powers; the other half was
owing to his perfect health, which enabled him to work harder and
more continuously than most men without suffering. He said that in
all his experience he had never known any one with an equal capacity
for mental labour; and that he could come again with a fresh appetite
to his studies after shorter intervals of rest than most. Now I,
being a doctor, trace a good deal of his superiority to the material
cause of a thoroughly good constitution, which Osborne hasn't got."

"Osborne might have, if he got out o' doors more," said the Squire,
moodily; "but except when he can loaf into Hollingford he doesn't
care to go out at all. I hope," he continued, with a glance of sudden
suspicion at Mr. Gibson, "he's not after one of your girls? I don't
mean any offence, you know; but he'll have the estate, and it won't
be free, and he must marry money. I don't think I could allow it in
Roger; but Osborne's the eldest son, you know."

Mr. Gibson reddened; he was offended for a moment. Then the partial
truth of what the Squire said was presented to his mind, and he
remembered their old friendship, so he spoke quietly, if shortly.

"I don't believe there's anything of the kind going on. I'm not much
at home, you know; but I've never heard or seen anything that should
make me suppose that there is. When I do, I'll let you know."

"Now, Gibson, don't go and be offended. I'm glad for the boys to have
a pleasant house to go to, and I thank you and Mrs. Gibson for making
it pleasant. Only keep off love; it can come to no good. That's
all. I don't believe Osborne will ever earn a farthing to keep a
wife during my life, and if I were to die to-morrow, she would have
to bring some money to clear the estate. And if I do speak as I
shouldn't have done formerly--a little sharp or so--why, it's because
I've been worried by many a care no one knows anything of."

"I'm not going to take offence," said Mr. Gibson, "but let us
understand each other clearly. If you don't want your sons to come
as much to my house as they do, tell them so yourself. I like the
lads, and am glad to see them; but if they do come, you must take the
consequences, whatever they are, and not blame me, or them either,
for what may happen from the frequent intercourse between two young
men and two young women; and what is more, though, as I said, I see
nothing whatever of the kind you fear at present, and have promised
to tell you of the first symptoms I do see, yet farther than that
I won't go. If there's an attachment at any future time, I won't
interfere."

"I shouldn't so much mind if Roger fell in love with your Molly. He
can fight for himself, you see, and she's an uncommon nice girl. My
poor wife was so fond of her," answered the Squire. "It's Osborne and
the estate I'm thinking of!"

"Well, then, tell him not to come near us. I shall be sorry, but you
will be safe."

"I'll think about it; but he's difficult to manage. I've always to
get my blood well up before I can speak my mind to him."

Mr. Gibson was leaving the room, but at these words he turned and
laid his hand on the Squire's arm.

"Take my advice, Squire. As I said, there's no harm done as yet, as
far as I know. Prevention is better than cure. Speak out, but speak
gently to Osborne, and do it at once. I shall understand how it is if
he doesn't show his face for some months in my house. If you speak
gently to him, he'll take the advice as from a friend. If he can
assure you there's no danger, of course he'll come just as usual,
when he likes."

It was all very fine giving the Squire this good advice; but as
Osborne had already formed the very kind of marriage his father most
deprecated, it did not act quite as well as Mr. Gibson had hoped. The
Squire began the conversation with unusual self-control; but he grew
irritated when Osborne denied his father's right to interfere in any
marriage he might contemplate; denied it with a certain degree of
doggedness and weariness of the subject that drove the Squire into
one of his passions; and although, on after reflection, he remembered
that he had his son's promise and solemn word not to think of either
Cynthia or Molly for his wife, yet the father and son had passed
through one of those altercations which help to estrange men for
life. Each had said bitter things to the other; and, if the brotherly
affection had not been so true between Osborne and Roger, they
too might have become alienated, in consequence of the Squire's
exaggerated and injudicious comparison of their characters and deeds.
But as Roger in his boyhood had loved Osborne too well to be jealous
of the praise and love which the eldest son, the beautiful brilliant
lad, had received, to the disparagement of his own plain awkwardness
and slowness, so now Osborne strove against any feeling of envy or
jealousy with all his might; but his efforts were conscious, Roger's
had been the simple consequence of affection, and the end to poor
Osborne was that he became moody and depressed in mind and body; but
both father and son concealed their feelings in Roger's presence.
When he came home just before sailing, busy and happy, the Squire
caught his infectious energy, and Osborne looked up and was cheerful.

There was no time to be lost. He was bound to a hot climate, and must
take all advantage possible of the winter months. He was to go first
to Paris, to have interviews with some of the scientific men there.
Some of his outfit, instruments, &c., were to follow him to Havre,
from which port he was to embark, after transacting his business in
Paris. The Squire learnt all his arrangements and plans, and even
tried in after-dinner conversations to penetrate into the questions
involved in the researches his son was about to make. But Roger's
visit home could not be prolonged beyond two days.

The last day he rode into Hollingford earlier than he needed to have
done to catch the London coach, in order to bid the Gibsons good-by.
He had been too actively busy for some time to have leisure to bestow
much thought on Cynthia; but there was no need for fresh meditation
on that subject. Her image as a prize to be worked for, to be served
for seven years, and seven years more, was safe and sacred in his
heart. It was very bad, this going away, and wishing her good-by
for two long years; and he wondered much during his ride how far he
should be justified in telling her mother, perhaps in telling her own
sweet self, what his feelings were without expecting, nay, indeed
reprobating, any answer on her part. Then she would know at any
rate how dearly she was beloved by one who was absent; how in all
difficulties or dangers the thought of her would be a polar star,
high up in the heavens, and so on, and so on; for with all a lover's
quickness of imagination and triteness of fancy, he called her
a star, a flower, a nymph, a witch, an angel, or a mermaid, a
nightingale, a siren, as one or another of her attributes rose up
before him.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

A LOVER'S MISTAKE.


It was afternoon. Molly had gone out for a walk. Mrs. Gibson had been
paying some calls. Lazy Cynthia had declined accompanying either. A
daily walk was not a necessity to her as it was to Molly. On a lovely
day, or with an agreeable object, or when the fancy took her, she
could go as far as any one; but these were exceptional cases; in
general, she was not disposed to disturb herself from her in-door
occupations. Indeed, not one of the ladies would have left the house,
had they been aware that Roger was in the neighbourhood; for they
were aware that he was to come down but once before his departure,
and that his stay at home then would be but for a short time, and
they were all anxious to wish him good-by before his long absence.
But they had understood that he was not coming to the Hall until
the following week, and therefore they had felt themselves at full
liberty this afternoon to follow their own devices.

Molly chose a walk that had been a favourite with her ever since she
was a child. Something or other had happened just before she left
home that made her begin wondering how far it was right for the sake
of domestic peace to pass over without comment the little deviations
from right that people perceive in those whom they live with. Or
whether, as they are placed in families for distinct purposes, not by
chance merely, there are not duties involved in this aspect of their
lot in life,--whether by continually passing over failings, their own
standard is not lowered,--the practical application of these thoughts
being a dismal sort of perplexity on Molly's part as to whether her
father was quite aware of her stepmother's perpetual lapses from
truth; and whether his blindness was wilful or not. Then she felt
bitterly enough that although she was sure as could be that there
was no real estrangement between her and her father, yet there were
perpetual obstacles thrown in the way of their intercourse; and she
thought with a sigh that if he would but come in with authority, he
might cut his way clear to the old intimacy with his daughter, and
that they might have all the former walks and talks, and quips and
cranks, and glimpses of real confidence once again; things that her
stepmother did not value, yet which she, like the dog in the manger,
prevented Molly's enjoying. But after all Molly was a girl, not so
far removed from childhood; and in the middle of her grave regrets
and perplexities, her eye was caught by the sight of some fine
ripe blackberries flourishing away high up on the hedge-bank among
scarlet hips and green and russet leaves. She did not care much for
blackberries herself; but she had heard Cynthia say that she liked
them; and besides there was the charm of scrambling and gathering
them; so she forgot all about her troubles, and went climbing up the
banks, and clutching at her almost inaccessible prizes, and slipping
down again triumphant, to carry them back to the large leaf which was
to serve her as a basket. One or two of them she tasted, but they
were as vapid to her palate as ever. The skirt of her pretty print
gown was torn out of the gathers, and even with the fruit she had
eaten "her pretty lips with blackberries were all besmeared and
dyed," when having gathered as many and more than she could possibly
carry, she set off home, hoping to escape into her room and mend her
gown before it had offended Mrs. Gibson's neat eye. The front door
was easily opened from the outside, and Molly was out of the clear
light of the open air and in the shadow of the hall, when she saw a
face peep out of the dining-room before she quite recognized whose it
was; and then Mrs. Gibson came softly out, sufficiently at least to
beckon her into the room. When Molly had entered Mrs. Gibson closed
the door. Poor Molly expected a reprimand for her torn gown and
untidy appearance, but was soon relieved by the expression of Mrs.
Gibson's face--mysterious and radiant.

"I've been watching for you, dear. Don't go upstairs into the
drawing-room, love. It might be a little interruption just now. Roger
Hamley is there with Cynthia; and I've reason to think--in fact I did
open the door unawares, but I shut it again softly, and I don't think
they heard me. Isn't it charming? Young love, you know, ah, how sweet
it is!"

"Do you mean that Roger has proposed to Cynthia?" asked Molly.

"Not exactly that. But I don't know; of course I know nothing. Only I
did hear him say that he had meant to leave England without speaking
of his love, but that the temptation of seeing her alone had been too
great for him. It was symptomatic, was it not, my dear? And all I
wanted was to let it come to a crisis without interruption. So I've
been watching for you to prevent your going in and disturbing them."

"But I may go to my own room, mayn't I," pleaded Molly.

"Of course," said Mrs. Gibson, a little testily. "Only I had expected
sympathy from you at such an interesting moment."

But Molly did not hear these last words. She had escaped upstairs,
and shut her door. Instinctively she had carried her leaf full of
blackberries--what would blackberries be to Cynthia now? She felt
as if she could not understand it all; but as for that matter, what
could she understand? Nothing. For a few minutes her brain seemed
in too great a whirl to comprehend anything but that she was being
carried on in earth's diurnal course, with rocks, and stones, and
trees, with as little volition on her part as if she were dead.
Then the room grew stifling, and instinctively she went to the open
casement window, and leant out, gasping for breath. Gradually the
consciousness of the soft peaceful landscape stole into her mind, and
stilled the buzzing confusion. There, bathed in the almost level rays
of the autumn sunlight, lay the landscape she had known and loved
from childhood; as quiet, as full of low humming life as it had been
at this hour for many generations. The autumn flowers blazed out in
the garden below, the lazy cows were in the meadow beyond, chewing
their cud in the green aftermath; the evening fires had just been
made up in the cottages beyond, in preparation for the husband's
home-coming, and were sending up soft curls of blue smoke into the
still air; the children, let loose from school, were shouting merrily
in the distance, and she-- Just then she heard nearer sounds; an
opened door, steps on the lower flight of stairs. He could not
have gone without even seeing her. He never, never would have done
so cruel a thing--never would have forgotten poor little Molly,
however happy he might be! No! there were steps and voices, and the
drawing-room door was opened and shut once more. She laid down her
head on her arms that rested upon the window-sill, and cried,--she
had been so distrustful as to have let the idea enter her mind that
he could go without wishing her good-by--her, whom his mother had so
loved, and called by the name of his little dead sister. And as she
thought of the tender love Mrs. Hamley had borne her she cried the
more, for the vanishing of such love for her off the face of the
earth. Suddenly the drawing-room door opened, and some one was heard
coming upstairs; it was Cynthia's step. Molly hastily wiped her eyes,
and stood up and tried to look unconcerned; it was all she had time
to do before Cynthia, after a little pause at the closed door, had
knocked; and on an answer being given, had said, without opening
the door,--"Molly! Mr. Roger Hamley is here, and wants to wish you
good-by before he goes." Then she went downstairs again, as if
anxious just at that moment to avoid even so short a tÉte-ł-tÉte with
Molly. With a gulp and a fit of resolution, as a child makes up its
mind to swallow a nauseous dose of medicine, Molly went instantly
downstairs.

Roger was talking earnestly to Mrs. Gibson in the bow of the window
when Molly entered; Cynthia was standing near, listening, but taking
no part in the conversation. Her eyes were downcast, and she did not
look up as Molly drew shyly near.

Roger was saying,--"I could never forgive myself if I had accepted a
pledge from her. She shall be free until my return; but the hope, the
words, her sweet goodness, have made me happy beyond description. Oh,
Molly!" suddenly becoming aware of her presence, and turning to her,
and taking her hand in both of his,--"I think you have long guessed
my secret, have you not? I once thought of speaking to you before I
left, and confiding it all to you. But the temptation has been too
great,--I have told Cynthia how fondly I love her, as far as words
can tell; and she says--" then he looked at Cynthia with passionate
delight, and seemed to forget in that gaze that he had left his
sentence to Molly half finished.

Cynthia did not seem inclined to repeat her saying, whatever it was,
but her mother spoke for her.

"My dear sweet girl values your love as it ought to be valued, I am
sure. And I believe," looking at Cynthia and Roger with intelligent
archness, "I could tell tales as to the cause of her indisposition in
the spring."

"Mother," said Cynthia suddenly, "you know it was no such thing. Pray
don't invent stories about me. I have engaged myself to Mr. Roger
Hamley, and that is enough."

"Enough! more than enough!" said Roger. "I will not accept your
pledge. I am bound, but you are free. I like to feel bound, it makes
me happy and at peace, but with all the chances involved in the next
two years, you must not shackle yourself by promises."

Cynthia did not speak at once; she was evidently revolving something
in her own mind. Mrs. Gibson took up the word.

"You are very generous, I am sure. Perhaps it will be better not to
mention it."

"I would much rather have it kept a secret," said Cynthia,
interrupting.

"Certainly, my dear love. That was just what I was going to say.
I once knew a young lady who heard of the death of a young man in
America, whom she had known pretty well; and she immediately said she
had been engaged to him, and even went so far as to put on weeds; and
it was a false report, for he came back well and merry, and declared
to everybody he had never so much as thought about her. So it was
very awkward for her. These things had much better be kept secret
until the proper time has come for divulging them."

Even then and there Cynthia could not resist the temptation of
saying,--"Mamma, I will promise you I won't put on weeds, whatever
reports come of Mr. Roger Hamley."

"Roger, please!" he put in, in a tender whisper.

"And you will all be witnesses that he has professed to think of me,
if he is tempted afterwards to deny the fact. But at the same time I
wish it to be kept a secret until his return--and I am sure you will
all be so kind as to attend to my wish. Please, _Roger!_ Please,
Molly! Mamma, I must especially beg it of you!"

Roger would have granted anything when she asked him by that name,
and in that tone. He took her hand in silent pledge of his reply.
Molly felt as if she could never bring herself to name the affair
as a common piece of news. So it was only Mrs. Gibson that answered
aloud,--

"My dear child! why 'especially' to poor me? You know I'm the most
trustworthy person alive!"

The little pendule on the chimney-piece struck the half-hour.

"I must go!" said Roger, in dismay. "I had no idea it was so late. I
shall write from Paris. The coach will be at the George by this time,
and will only stay five minutes. Dearest Cynthia--" he took her hand,
and then, as if the temptation was irresistible, he drew her to him
and kissed her. "Only remember you are free!" said he, as he released
her and passed on to Mrs. Gibson.

"If I had considered myself free," said Cynthia, blushing a little,
but ready with her repartee to the last,--"if I had thought myself
free, do you think I would have allowed that?"

Then Molly's turn came, and the old brotherly tenderness came back
into his look, his voice, his bearing.

"Molly! you won't forget me, I know; I shall never forget you, nor
your goodness to--her." His voice began to quiver, and it was best
to be gone. Mrs. Gibson was pouring out, unheard and unheeded, words
of farewell; Cynthia was re-arranging some flowers in a vase on the
table, the defects in which had caught her artistic eye, without
the consciousness penetrating to her mind. Molly stood, numb to the
heart; neither glad nor sorry, nor anything but stunned. She felt the
slackened touch of the warm grasping hand; she looked up--for till
now her eyes had been downcast, as if there were heavy weights to
their lids--and the place was empty where he had been; his quick
step was heard on the stair, the front door was opened and shut;
and then as quick as lightning Molly ran up to the front attic--the
lumber-room, whose window commanded the street down which he
must pass. The window-clasp was unused and stiff, Molly tugged at
it--unless it was open, and her head put out, that last chance would
be gone.

"I must see him again; I must! I must!" she wailed out, as she was
pulling. There he was, running hard to catch the London coach; his
luggage had been left at the George before he came up to wish the
Gibsons good-by. In all his hurry, Molly saw him turn round and shade
his eyes from the level rays of the westering sun, and rake the house
with his glances--in hopes, she knew, of catching one more glimpse of
Cynthia. But apparently he saw no one, not even Molly at the attic
casement; for she had drawn back when he had turned, and kept herself
in shadow; for she had no right to put herself forward as the one to
watch and yearn for farewell signs. None came--another moment--he was
out of sight for years!


[Illustration: THE LAST TURNING.]


She shut the window softly, and shivered all over. She left the attic
and went to her own room; but she did not begin to take off her
out-of-door things till she heard Cynthia's foot on the stairs.
Then she hastily went to the toilet-table, and began to untie her
bonnet-strings; but they were in a knot, and took time to undo.
Cynthia's step stopped at Molly's door; she opened it a little and
said,--"May I come in, Molly?"

"Certainly," said Molly, longing to be able to say "No" all the time.
Molly did not turn to meet her, so Cynthia came up behind her, and
putting her two hands round Molly's waist, peeped over her shoulder,
putting out her lips to be kissed. Molly could not resist the
action--the mute entreaty for a caress. But, in the moment before,
she had caught the reflection of the two faces in the glass; her
own, red-eyed, pale, with lips dyed with blackberry juice, her curls
tangled, her bonnet pulled awry, her gown torn--and contrasted it
with Cynthia's brightness and bloom, and the trim elegance of her
dress. "Oh! it is no wonder!" thought poor Molly, as she turned
round, and put her arms round Cynthia, and laid her head for an
instant on her shoulder--the weary, aching head that sought a loving
pillow in that supreme moment! The next she had raised herself, and
taken Cynthia's two hands, and was holding her off a little, the
better to read her face.


[Illustration: "OH! IT IS NO WONDER!"]


"Cynthia! you do love him dearly, don't you?"

Cynthia winced a little aside from the penetrating steadiness of
those eyes.

"You speak with all the solemnity of an adjuration, Molly!" said she,
laughing a little at first to cover her nervousness, and then looking
up at Molly. "Don't you think I've given a proof of it? But you know
I've often told you I've not the gift of loving; I said pretty much
the same thing to him. I can respect, and I fancy I can admire, and
I can like, but I never feel carried off my feet by love for any one,
not even for you, little Molly, and I'm sure I love you more than--"

"No, don't!" said Molly, putting her hand before Cynthia's mouth, in
almost a passion of impatience. "Don't, don't--I won't hear you--I
ought not to have asked you--it makes you tell lies!"

"Why, Molly!" said Cynthia, in her turn seeking to read Molly's
face, "what's the matter with you? One might think you cared for him
yourself."

"I?" said Molly, all the blood rushing to her heart suddenly; then it
returned, and she had courage to speak, and she spoke the truth as
she believed it, though not the real actual truth.

"I do care for him; I think you have won the love of a prince amongst
men. Why, I am proud to remember that he has been to me as a brother,
and I love him as a sister, and I love you doubly because he has
honoured you with his love."

"Come, that's not complimentary!" said Cynthia, laughing, but
not ill-pleased to hear her lover's praises, and even willing to
depreciate him a little in order to hear more.

"He's well enough, I daresay, and a great deal too learned and clever
for a stupid girl like me; but even you must acknowledge he's very
plain and awkward; and I like pretty things and pretty people."

"Cynthia, I won't talk to you about him. You know you don't mean what
you are saying, and you only say it out of contradiction, because I
praise him. He shan't be run down by you, even in joke."

"Well, then, we won't talk of him at all. I was so surprised when
he began to speak--so--" and Cynthia looked very lovely, blushing
and dimpling up as she remembered his words and looks. Suddenly she
recalled herself to the present time, and her eye caught on the leaf
full of blackberries--the broad, green leaf, so fresh and crisp when
Molly had gathered it an hour or so ago, but now soft and flabby, and
dying. Molly saw it, too, and felt a strange kind of sympathetic pity
for the poor inanimate leaf.

"Oh! what blackberries! you've gathered them for me, I know!" said
Cynthia, sitting down and beginning to feed herself daintily,
touching them lightly with the ends of her taper fingers, and
dropping each ripe berry into her open mouth. When she had eaten
about half she stopped suddenly short.

"How I should like to have gone as far as Paris with him!" she
exclaimed. "I suppose it wouldn't have been proper; but how pleasant
it would have been! I remember at Boulogne" (another blackberry),
"how I used to envy the English who were going to Paris; it seemed
to me then as if nobody stopped at Boulogne, but dull, stupid
school-girls."

"When will he be there?" asked Molly.

"On Wednesday, he said. I'm to write to him there; at any rate he's
going to write to me."

Molly went about the adjustment of her dress in a quiet,
business-like manner, not speaking much; Cynthia, although sitting
still, seemed very restless. Oh! how much Molly wished that she would
go.

"Perhaps, after all," said Cynthia, after a pause of apparent
meditation, "we shall never be married."

"Why do you say that?" said Molly, almost bitterly. "You have nothing
to make you think so. I wonder how you can bear to think you won't,
even for a moment."

"Oh!" said Cynthia; "you mustn't go and take me _au grand sÄrieux_. I
daresay I don't mean what I say, but you see everything seems a dream
at present. Still, I think the chances are equal--the chances for and
against our marriage, I mean. Two years! it's a long time! he may
change his mind, or I may; or some one else may turn up, and I may
get engaged to him: what should you think of that, Molly? I'm putting
such a gloomy thing as death quite on one side, you see; yet in two
years how much may happen!"

"Don't talk so, Cynthia, please don't," said Molly, piteously. "One
would think you didn't care for him, and he cares so much for you!"

"Why, did I say I didn't care for him? I was only calculating
chances. I'm sure I hope nothing will happen to prevent the marriage.
Only, you know it may, and I thought I was taking a step in wisdom,
in looking forward to all the evils that might befall. I'm sure all
the wise people I've ever known thought it a virtue to have gloomy
prognostics of the future. But you're not in a mood for wisdom or
virtue, I see; so I'll go and get ready for dinner, and leave you to
your vanities of dress."

She took Molly's face in both her hands, before Molly was aware
of her intention, and kissed it playfully. Then she left Molly to
herself.




CHAPTER XXXV.

THE MOTHER'S MANOEUVRE.


Mr. Gibson was not at home at dinner--detained by some patient, most
probably. This was not an unusual occurrence; but it _was_ rather an
unusual occurrence for Mrs. Gibson to go down into the dining-room,
and sit with him as he ate his deferred meal when he came in an hour
or two later. In general, she preferred her easy-chair, or her corner
of the sofa, upstairs in the drawing-room, though it was very rarely
that she would allow Molly to avail herself of her stepmother's
neglected privilege. Molly would fain have gone down and kept her
father company every night that he had these solitary meals; but for
peace and quietness she gave up her own wishes on the matter.

Mrs. Gibson took a seat by the fire in the dining-room, and patiently
waited for the auspicious moment when Mr. Gibson, having satisfied
his healthy appetite, turned from the table, and took his place by
her side. She got up, and with unaccustomed attention moved the wine
and glasses so that he could help himself without moving from his
chair.

"There, now! are you comfortable? for I have a great piece of news to
tell you!" said she, when all was arranged.

"I thought there was something on hand," said he, smiling. "Now for
it!"

"Roger Hamley has been here this afternoon to bid us good-by."

"Good-by! Is he gone? I didn't know he was going so soon!" exclaimed
Mr. Gibson.

"Yes: never mind, that's not it."

"But tell me; has he left this neighbourhood? I wanted to have seen
him."

"Yes, yes. He left love and regret, and all that sort of thing
for you. Now let me get on with my story: he found Cynthia alone,
proposed to her, and was accepted."

"Cynthia? Roger proposed to her, and she accepted him?" repeated Mr.
Gibson, slowly.

"Yes, to be sure. Why not? you speak as if it was something so very
surprising."

"Did I? But I am surprised. He's a very fine young fellow, and I
wish Cynthia joy; but do you like it? It will have to be a very long
engagement."

"Perhaps," said she, in a knowing manner.

"At any rate he will be away for two years," said Mr. Gibson.

"A great deal may happen in two years," she replied.

"Yes! he will have to run many risks, and go into many dangers, and
will come back no nearer to the power of maintaining a wife than when
he went out."

"I don't know that," she replied, still in the arch manner of one
possessing superior knowledge. "A little bird did tell me that
Osborne's life is not so very secure; and then--what will Roger be?
Heir to the estate."

"Who told you that about Osborne?" said he, facing round upon her,
and frightening her with his sudden sternness of voice and manner.
It seemed as if absolute fire came out of his long dark sombre eyes.
"_Who_ told you, I say?"

She made a faint rally back into her former playfulness.

"Why? can you deny it? Is it not the truth?"

"I ask you again, Hyacinth, who told you that Osborne Hamley's life
is in more danger than mine--or yours?"

"Oh, don't speak in that frightening way. My life is not in danger,
I'm sure; nor yours either, love, I hope."

He gave an impatient movement, and knocked a wine-glass off the
table. For the moment she felt grateful for the diversion, and
busied herself in picking up the fragments: "bits of glass were so
dangerous," she said. But she was startled by a voice of command,
such as she had never yet heard from her husband.

"Never mind the glass. I ask you again, Hyacinth, who told you
anything about Osborne Hamley's state of health?"

"I am sure I wish no harm to him, and I daresay he is in very good
health, as you say," whispered she, at last.

"Who told--?" began he again, sterner than ever.

"Well, if you will know, and will make such a fuss about it," said
she, driven to extremity, "it was you yourself--you or Dr. Nicholls,
I am sure I forget which."

"I never spoke to you on the subject, and I don't believe Nicholls
did. You'd better tell me at once what you're alluding to, for I'm
resolved I'll have it out before we leave this room."

"I wish I'd never married again," she said, now fairly crying, and
looking round the room, as if in vain search for a mouse-hole in
which to hide herself. Then, as if the sight of the door into the
store-room gave her courage, she turned and faced him.

"You should not talk your medical secrets so loud then, if you don't
want people to hear them. I had to go into the store-room that day
Dr. Nicholls was here; cook wanted a jar of preserve, and stopped me
just as I was going out--I am sure it was for no pleasure of mine,
for I was sadly afraid of stickying my gloves--it was all that you
might have a comfortable dinner."

She looked as if she was going to cry again, but he gravely motioned
her to go on, merely saying,--

"Well! you overheard our conversation, I suppose?"

"Not much," she answered eagerly, almost relieved by being thus
helped out in her forced confession. "Only a sentence or two."

"What were they?" he asked.

"Why, you had just been saying something, and Dr. Nicholls said, 'If
he has got aneurism of the aorta his days are numbered.'"

"Well. Anything more?"

"Yes; you said, 'I hope to God I may be mistaken; but there is a
pretty clear indication of symptoms, in my opinion.'"

"How do you know we were speaking of Osborne Hamley?" he asked;
perhaps in hopes of throwing her off the scent. But as soon as she
perceived that he was descending to her level of subterfuge, she took
courage, and said in quite a different tone to the cowed one which
she had been using:

"Oh! I know. I heard his name mentioned by you both before I began to
listen."

"Then you own you did listen?"

"Yes," said she, hesitating a little now.

"And pray how do you come to remember so exactly the name of the
disease spoken of?"

"Because I went--now don't be angry, I really can't see any harm in
what I did--"

"Then, don't deprecate anger. You went--"

"Into the surgery, and looked it out. Why might not I?"

Mr. Gibson did not answer--did not look at her. His face was very
pale, and both forehead and lips were contracted. At length he roused
himself, sighed, and said,--

"Well! I suppose as one brews one must bake."

"I don't understand what you mean," pouted she.

"Perhaps not," he replied. "I suppose that it was what you heard on
that occasion that made you change your behaviour to Roger Hamley?
I've noticed how much more civil you were to him of late."

"If you mean that I have ever got to like him as much as Osborne,
you are very much mistaken; no, not even though he has offered to
Cynthia, and is to be my son-in-law."

"Let me know the whole affair. You overheard,--I will own that it was
Osborne about whom we were speaking, though I shall have something to
say about that presently--and then, if I understand you rightly, you
changed your behaviour to Roger, and made him more welcome to this
house than you had ever done before, regarding him as proximate heir
to the Hamley estates?"

"I don't know what you mean by 'proximate.'"

"Go into the surgery, and look into the dictionary, then," said he,
losing his temper for the first time during the conversation.

"I knew," said she through sobs and tears, "that Roger had taken
a fancy to Cynthia; any one might see that; and as long as Roger
was only a younger son, with no profession, and nothing but his
fellowship, I thought it right to discourage him, as any one would
who had a grain of common sense in them; for a clumsier, more common,
awkward, stupid fellow I never saw--to be called 'county,' I mean."

"Take care; you'll have to eat your words presently when you come to
fancy he'll have Hamley some day."

"No, I shan't," said she, not perceiving his exact drift. "You are
vexed now because it is not Molly he's in love with; and I call it
very unjust and unfair to my poor fatherless girl. I am sure I have
always tried to further Molly's interests as if she was my own
daughter."

Mr. Gibson was too indifferent to this accusation to take any notice
of it. He returned to what was of far more importance to him.

"The point I want to be clear about is this. Did you or did you not
alter your behaviour to Roger in consequence of what you overheard of
my professional conversation with Dr. Nicholls? Have you not favoured
his suit to Cynthia since then, on the understanding gathered from
that conversation that he stood a good chance of inheriting Hamley?"

"I suppose I did," said she, sulkily. "And if I did, I can't
see any harm in it, that I should be questioned as if I were
in a witness-box. He was in love with Cynthia long before that
conversation, and she liked him so much. It was not for me to cross
the path of true love. I don't see how you would have a mother show
her love for her child if she may not turn accidental circumstances
to her advantage. Perhaps Cynthia might have died if she had been
crossed in love; her poor father was consumptive."

"Don't you know that all professional conversations are confidential?
That it would be the most dishonourable thing possible for me to
betray secrets which I learn in the exercise of my profession?"

"Yes, of course, you."

"Well! and are not you and I one in all these respects? You cannot do
a dishonourable act without my being inculpated in the disgrace. If
it would be a deep disgrace for me to betray a professional secret,
what would it be for me to trade on that knowledge?"

He was trying hard to be patient; but the offence was of that class
which galled him insupportably.

"I don't know what you mean by trading. Trading in a daughter's
affections is the last thing I should do; and I should have thought
you would be rather glad than otherwise to get Cynthia well married,
and off your hands."

Mr. Gibson got up, and walked about the room, his hands in his
pockets. Once or twice he began to speak, but he stopped impatiently
short without going on.

"I don't know what to say to you," he said at length. "You either
can't or won't see what I mean. I'm glad enough to have Cynthia here.
I have given her a true welcome, and I sincerely hope she will find
this house as much a home as my own daughter does. But for the future
I must look out of my doors, and double-lock the approaches if I am
so foolish as to-- However, that's past and gone; and it remains with
me to prevent its recurrence as far as I can for the future. Now let
us hear the present state of affairs."

"I don't think I ought to tell you anything about it. It is a secret,
just as much as your mysteries are."

"Very well; you have told me enough for me to act upon, which I
most certainly shall do. It was only the other day I promised the
Squire to let him know if I suspected anything--any love affair, or
entanglement, much less an engagement, between either of his sons and
our girls."

"But this is not an engagement; he would not let it be so; if you
would only listen to me, I could tell you all. Only I do hope you
won't go and tell the Squire and everybody. Cynthia did so beg that
it might not be known. It is only my unfortunate frankness that has
led me into this scrape. I never could keep a secret from those whom
I love."

"I must tell the Squire. I shall not mention it to any one else. And
do you quite think it was consistent with your general frankness to
have overheard what you did, and never to have mentioned it to me?
I could have told you then that Dr. Nicholls' opinion was decidedly
opposed to mine, and that he believed that the disturbance about
which I consulted him on Osborne's behalf was merely temporary. Dr.
Nicholls would tell you that Osborne is as likely as any man to live
and marry and beget children."

If there was any skill used by Mr. Gibson so to word this speech
as to conceal his own opinion, Mrs. Gibson was not sharp enough to
find it out. She was dismayed, and Mr. Gibson enjoyed her dismay; it
restored him to something like his usual frame of mind.

"Let us review this misfortune, for I see you consider it as such,"
said he.

"No, not quite a misfortune," said she. "But, certainly, if I had
known Dr. Nicholls' opinion--" she hesitated.

"You see the advantage of always consulting me," he continued
gravely. "Here is Cynthia engaged--"

"Not engaged, I told you before. He would not allow it to be
considered an engagement on her part."

"Well, entangled in a love-affair with a lad of three-and-twenty,
with nothing beyond his fellowship and a chance of inheriting an
encumbered estate; no profession even, abroad for two years, and
I must go and tell his father all about it to-morrow."

"Oh dear! Pray say that, if he dislikes it, he has only to express
his opinion."

"I don't think you can act without Cynthia in the affair. And if I am
not mistaken, Cynthia will have a pretty stout will of her own on the
subject."

"Oh, I don't think she cares for him very much; she is not one to be
always falling in love, and she does not take things very deeply to
heart. But, of course, one would not do anything abruptly; two years'
absence gives one plenty of time to turn oneself in."

"But a little while ago we were threatened with consumption and an
early death if Cynthia's affections were thwarted."

"Oh, you dear creature, how you remember all my silly words! It might
be, you know. Poor dear Mr. Kirkpatrick was consumptive, and Cynthia
may have inherited it, and a great sorrow might bring out the latent
seeds. At times I am so fearful. But I daresay it is not probable,
for I don't think she takes things very deeply to heart."

"Then I'm quite at liberty to give up the affair, acting as Cynthia's
proxy, if the Squire disapproves of it?"

Poor Mrs. Gibson was in a strait at this question.

"No!" she said at last. "We cannot give it up. I am sure Cynthia
would not; especially if she thought others were acting for her. And
he really is very much in love. I wish he were in Osborne's place."

"Shall I tell you what I should do?" said Mr. Gibson, in real
earnest. "However it may have been brought about, here are two young
people in love with each other. One is as fine a young fellow as ever
breathed; the other a very pretty, lively, agreeable girl. The father
of the young man must be told, and it is most likely he will bluster
and oppose; for there is no doubt it is an imprudent affair as far as
money goes. But let them be steady and patient, and a better lot need
await no young woman. I only wish it were Molly's good fortune to
meet with such another."

"I will try for her; I will indeed," said Mrs. Gibson, relieved by
his change of tone.

"No, don't. That's one thing I forbid. I'll have no 'trying' for
Molly."

"Well, don't be angry, dear! Do you know I was quite afraid you were
going to lose your temper at one time."

"It would have been of no use!" said he, gloomily, getting up as if
to close the sitting. His wife was only too glad to make her escape.
The conjugal interview had not been satisfactory to either. Mr.
Gibson had been compelled to face and acknowledge the fact, that the
wife he had chosen had a very different standard of conduct from
that which he had upheld all his life, and had hoped to have seen
inculcated in his daughter. He was more irritated than he chose to
show; for there was so much of self-reproach in his irritation that
he kept it to himself, brooded over it, and allowed a feeling of
suspicious dissatisfaction with his wife to grow up in his mind,
which extended itself by-and-by to the innocent Cynthia, and
caused his manner to both mother and daughter to assume a certain
curt severity, which took the latter at any rate with extreme
surprise. But on the present occasion he followed his wife up to the
drawing-room, and gravely congratulated the astonished Cynthia.

"Has mamma told you?" said she, shooting an indignant glance at her
mother. "It is hardly an engagement; and we all pledged ourselves to
keep it a secret, mamma among the rest!"

"But, my dearest Cynthia, you could not expect--you could not have
wished me to keep a secret from my husband?" pleaded Mrs. Gibson.

"No, perhaps not. At any rate, sir," said Cynthia, turning towards
him with graceful frankness, "I am glad you should know it. You have
always been a most kind friend to me, and I daresay I should have
told you myself, but I did not want it named; if you please, it must
still be a secret. In fact, it is hardly an engagement--he" (she
blushed and sparkled a little at the euphuism, which implied that
there was but one "he" present in her thoughts at the moment) "would
not allow me to bind myself by any promise until his return!"

Mr. Gibson looked gravely at her, irresponsive to her winning looks,
which at the moment reminded him too forcibly of her mother's ways.
Then he took her hand, and said, seriously enough,--"I hope you are
worthy of him, Cynthia, for you have indeed drawn a prize. I have
never known a truer or warmer heart than Roger's; and I have known
him boy and man."

Molly felt as if she could have thanked her father aloud for this
testimony to the value of him who was gone away. But Cynthia pouted a
little before she smiled up in his face.

"You are not complimentary, are you, Mr. Gibson?" said she. "He
thinks me worthy, I suppose; and if you have so high an opinion
of him, you ought to respect his judgment of me." If she hoped to
provoke a compliment she was disappointed, for Mr. Gibson let go her
hand in an absent manner, and sate down in an easy chair by the fire,
gazing at the wood embers as if hoping to read the future in them.
Molly saw Cynthia's eyes fill with tears, and followed her to the
other end of the room, where she had gone to seek some working
materials.

"Dear Cynthia," was all she said; but she pressed her hand while
trying to assist in the search.

"Oh, Molly, I am so fond of your father; what makes him speak so to
me to-night?"

"I don't know," said Molly; "perhaps he's tired."

They were recalled from further conversation by Mr. Gibson. He had
roused himself from his reverie, and was now addressing Cynthia.

"I hope you will not consider it a breach of confidence, Cynthia, but
I must tell the Squire of--of what has taken place to-day between
you and his son. I have bound myself by a promise to him. He was
afraid--it's as well to tell you the truth--he was afraid" (an
emphasis on this last word) "of something of this kind between his
sons and one of you two girls. It was only the other day I assured
him there was nothing of the kind on foot; and I told him then I
would inform him at once if I saw any symptoms."

Cynthia looked extremely annoyed.

"It was the one thing I stipulated for--secrecy."

"But why?" said Mr. Gibson. "I can understand your not wishing to
have it made public under the present circumstances. But the nearest
friends on both sides! Surely you can have no objection to that?"

"Yes, I have," said Cynthia; "I would not have had any one know if I
could have helped it."

"I'm almost certain Roger will tell his father."

"No, he won't," said Cynthia; "I made him promise, and I think he is
one to respect a promise"--with a glance at her mother, who, feeling
herself in disgrace with both husband and child, was keeping a
judicious silence.

"Well, at any rate, the story would come with so much better a grace
from him that I shall give him the chance; I won't go over to the
Hall till the end of the week; he may have written and told his
father before then."

Cynthia held her tongue for a little while. Then she said, with
tearful pettishness,--

"A man's promise is to override a woman's wish, then, is it?"

"I don't see any reason why it should not."

"Will you trust in my reasons when I tell you it will cause me
a great deal of distress if it gets known?" She said this in so
pleading a voice, that if Mr. Gibson had not been thoroughly
displeased and annoyed by his previous conversation with her mother,
he must have yielded to her. As it was, he said, coldly,--"Telling
Roger's father is not making it public. I don't like this exaggerated
desire for such secrecy, Cynthia. It seems to me as if something more
than is apparent was concealed behind it."

"Come, Molly," said Cynthia, suddenly; "let us sing that duet I've
been teaching you; it's better than talking as we are doing."

It was a little lively French duet. Molly sang it carelessly, with
heaviness at her heart; but Cynthia sang it with spirit and apparent
merriment; only she broke down in hysterics at last, and flew
upstairs to her own room. Molly, heeding nothing else--neither her
father nor Mrs. Gibson's words--followed her, and found the door of
her bedroom locked, and for all reply to her entreaties to be allowed
to come in, she heard Cynthia sobbing and crying.

It was more than a week after the incidents just recorded before
Mr. Gibson found himself at liberty to call on the Squire; and he
heartily hoped that long before then, Roger's letter might have
arrived from Paris, telling his father the whole story. But he saw at
the first glance that the Squire had heard nothing unusual to disturb
his equanimity. He was looking better than he had done for months
past; the light of hope was in his eyes, his face seemed of a healthy
ruddy colour, gained partly by his resumption of outdoor employment
in the superintendence of the works, and partly because the happiness
he had lately had through Roger's means, caused his blood to flow
with regular vigour. He had felt Roger's going away, it is true; but
whenever the sorrow of parting with him pressed too heavily upon him,
he filled his pipe, and smoked it out over a long, slow, deliberate,
re-perusal of Lord Hollingford's letter, every word of which he knew
by heart; but expressions in which he made a pretence to himself
of doubting, that he might have an excuse for looking at his son's
praises once again. The first greetings over, Mr. Gibson plunged into
his subject.

"Any news from Roger yet?"

"Oh, yes; here's his letter," said the Squire, producing his black
leather case, in which Roger's missive had been placed along with the
other very heterogeneous contents.

Mr. Gibson read it, hardly seeing the words after he had by one rapid
glance assured himself that there was no mention of Cynthia in it.

"Hum! I see he doesn't name one very important event that has
befallen him since he left you," said Mr. Gibson, seizing on the
first words that came. "I believe I'm committing a breach of
confidence on one side; but I'm going to keep the promise I made
the last time I was here. I find there is something--something
of the kind you apprehended--you understand--between him and my
step-daughter, Cynthia Kirkpatrick. He called at our house to wish
us good-by, while waiting for the London coach, found her alone, and
spoke to her. They don't call it an engagement, but of course it is
one."

"Give me back the letter," said the Squire, in a constrained kind of
voice. Then he read it again, as if he had not previously mastered
its contents, and as if there might be some sentence or sentences he
had overlooked.

"No!" he said at last, with a sigh. "He tells me nothing about it.
Lads may play at confidences with their fathers, but they keep a deal
back." The Squire appeared more disappointed at not having heard of
this straight from Roger than displeased at the fact itself, Mr.
Gibson thought. But he let him take his time.

"He's not the eldest son," continued the Squire, talking as it
were to himself. "But it's not the match I should have planned
for him. How came you, sir," said he, firing round on Mr. Gibson,
suddenly--"to say when you were last here, that there was nothing
between my sons and either of your girls? Why, this must have been
going on all the time!"

"I'm afraid it was. But I was as ignorant about it as the babe
unborn. I only heard of it on the evening of the day of Roger's
departure."

"And that's a week ago, sir. What's kept you quiet ever since?"

"I thought that Roger would tell you himself."

"That shows you've no sons. More than half their life is unknown to
their fathers. Why, Osborne there, we live together--that's to say,
we have our meals together, and we sleep under the same roof--and
yet--Well! well! life is as God has made it. You say it's not an
engagement yet? But I wonder what I'm doing? Hoping for my lad's
disappointment in the folly he's set his heart on--and just when he's
been helping me. Is it a folly, or is it not? I ask you, Gibson, for
you must know this girl. She hasn't much money, I suppose?"

"About thirty pounds a year, at my pleasure during her mother's
life."

"Whew! It's well he's not Osborne. They'll have to wait. What family
is she of? None of 'em in trade, I reckon, from her being so poor?"

"I believe her father was grandson of a certain Sir Gerald
Kirkpatrick. Her mother tells me it is an old baronetcy. I know
nothing of such things."

"That's something. I do know something of such things, as you are
pleased to call them. I like honourable blood."

Mr. Gibson could not help saying, "But I'm afraid that only
one-eighth of Cynthia's blood is honourable; I know nothing further
of her relations excepting the fact that her father was a curate."

"Professional. That's a step above trade at any rate. How old is
she?"

"Eighteen or nineteen."

"Pretty?"

"Yes, I think so; most people do; but it's all a matter of taste.
Come, Squire, judge for yourself. Ride over and take lunch with us
any day you like. I may not be in; but her mother will be there, and
you can make acquaintance with your son's future wife."

This was going too fast, however; presuming too much on the quietness
with which the Squire had been questioning him. Mr. Hamley drew back
within his shell, and spoke in a surly manner as he replied,--

"Roger's 'future wife!' He'll be wiser by the time he comes home. Two
years among the black folk will have put more sense in him."

"Possible, but not probable, I should say," replied Mr. Gibson.
"Black folk are not remarkable for their powers of reasoning, I
believe, so that they haven't much chance of altering his opinion
by argument, even if they understood each other's language; and
certainly if he shares my taste, their peculiarity of complexion will
only make him appreciate white skins the more."

"But you said it was no engagement," growled the Squire. "If he
thinks better of it, you won't keep him to it, will you?"

"If he wishes to break it off, I shall certainly advise Cynthia to
be equally willing, that's all I can say. And I see no reason for
discussing the affair further at present. I've told you how matters
stand because I promised you I would, if I saw anything of this kind
going on. But in the present condition of things, we can neither make
nor mar; we can only wait." And he took up his hat to go. But the
Squire was discontented.

"Don't go, Gibson. Don't take offence at what I've said, though I'm
sure I don't know why you should. What's the girl like in herself?"

"I don't know what you mean," said Mr. Gibson. But he did; only he
was vexed, and did not choose to understand.

"Is she--well, is she like your Molly?--sweet-tempered and
sensible--with her gloves always mended, and neat about the feet, and
ready to do anything one asks her just as if doing it was the very
thing she liked best in the world?"

Mr. Gibson's face relaxed now, and he could understand all the
Squire's broken sentences and unexplained meanings.

"She is much prettier than Molly to begin with, and has very winning
ways. She's always well-dressed and smart-looking, and I know she
hasn't much to spend on her clothes, and always does what she's asked
to do, and is ready enough with her pretty, lively answers. I don't
think I ever saw her out of temper; but then I'm not sure if she
takes things keenly to heart, and a certain obtuseness of feeling
goes a great way towards a character for good temper, I've observed.
Altogether I think Cynthia is one in a hundred."

The Squire meditated a little. "Your Molly is one in a thousand, to
my mind. But then, you see, she comes of no family at all,--and I
don't suppose she'll have a chance of much money." This he said as if
he were thinking aloud, and without reference to Mr. Gibson, but it
nettled the latter, and he replied somewhat impatiently,--

"Well, but as there's no question of Molly in this business, I don't
see the use of bringing her name in, and considering either her
family or her fortune."

"No, to be sure not," said the Squire, rousing up. "My wits had gone
far afield, and I'll own I was only thinking what a pity it was she
wouldn't do for Osborne. But, of course, it's out of the
question--out of the question."

"Yes," said Mr. Gibson, "and if you will excuse me, Squire, I really
must go now, and then you'll be at liberty to send your wits afield
uninterrupted." This time he was at the door before the Squire
called him back. He stood impatiently hitting his top-boots with his
riding-whip, waiting for the interminable last words.

"I say, Gibson, we're old friends, and you're a fool if you take
anything I say as an offence. Madam your wife and I didn't hit it off
the only time I ever saw her. I won't say she was silly, but I think
one of us was silly, and it wasn't me. However, we'll pass that over.
Suppose you bring her, and this girl Cynthia (which is as outlandish
a Christian name as I'd wish to hear), and little Molly out here to
lunch some day,--I'm more at my ease in my own house,--and I'm more
sure to be civil, too. We need say nothing about Roger,--neither the
lass nor me,--and you keep your wife's tongue quiet, if you can. It
will only be like a compliment to you on your marriage, you know--and
no one must take it for anything more. Mind, no allusion or mention
of Roger, and this piece of folly. I shall see the girl then, and
I can judge her for myself; for, as you say, that will be the best
plan. Osborne will be here too; and he's always in his element
talking to women. I sometimes think he's half a woman himself, he
spends so much money and is so unreasonable."

The Squire was pleased with his own speech and his own thought, and
smiled a little as he finished speaking. Mr. Gibson was both pleased
and amused; and he smiled too, anxious as he was to be gone. The next
Thursday was soon fixed upon as the day on which Mr. Gibson was to
bring his womenkind out to the Hall. He thought that, on the whole,
the interview had gone off a good deal better than he had expected,
and felt rather proud of the invitation of which he was the bearer.
Therefore Mrs. Gibson's manner of receiving it was an annoyance to
him. She, meanwhile, had been considering herself as an injured woman
ever since the evening of the day of Roger's departure; what business
had any one had to speak as if the chances of Osborne's life being
prolonged were infinitely small, if in fact the matter was uncertain?
She liked Osborne extremely, much better than Roger; and would gladly
have schemed to secure him for Cynthia, if she had not shrunk from
the notion of her daughter's becoming a widow. For if Mrs. Gibson had
ever felt anything acutely it was the death of Mr. Kirkpatrick; and,
amiably callous as she was in most things, she recoiled from exposing
her daughter wilfully to the same kind of suffering which she herself
had experienced. But if she had only known Dr. Nicholls' opinion she
would never have favoured Roger's suit; never. And then Mr. Gibson
himself; why was he so cold and reserved in his treatment of her
since that night of explanation? She had done nothing wrong; yet she
was treated as though she were in disgrace. And everything about
the house was flat just now. She even missed the little excitement
of Roger's visits, and the watching of his attentions to Cynthia.
Cynthia too was silent enough; and as for Molly, she was absolutely
dull and out of spirits, a state of mind so annoying to Mrs. Gibson
just now, that she vented some of her discontent upon the poor girl,
from whom she feared neither complaint nor repartee.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

DOMESTIC DIPLOMACY.


The evening of the day on which Mr. Gibson had been to see the
Squire, the three women were alone in the drawing-room, for Mr.
Gibson had had a long round and was not as yet come in. They had had
to wait dinner for him; and for some time after his return there was
nothing done or said but what related to the necessary business of
eating. Mr. Gibson was, perhaps, as well satisfied with his day's
work as any of the four; for this visit to the Squire had been
weighing on his mind ever since he had heard of the state of things
between Roger and Cynthia. He did not like the having to go and
tell of a love-affair so soon after he had declared his belief
that no such thing existed; it was a confession of fallibility
which is distasteful to most men. If the Squire had not been of
so unsuspicious and simple a nature, he might have drawn his own
conclusions from the apparent concealment of facts, and felt doubtful
of Mr. Gibson's perfect honesty in the business; but being what
he was, there was no danger of such unjust misapprehension. Still
Mr. Gibson knew the hot hasty temper he had to deal with, and had
expected more violence of language than he really encountered; and
the last arrangement by which Cynthia, her mother, and Molly--who, as
Mr. Gibson thought to himself, and smiled at the thought, was sure to
be a peacemaker, and a sweetener of intercourse--were to go to the
Hall and make acquaintance with the Squire, appeared like a great
success to Mr. Gibson, for achieving which he took not a little
credit to himself. Altogether, he was more cheerful and bland than he
had been for many days; and when he came up into the drawing-room for
a few minutes after dinner, before going out again to see his town
patients, he whistled a little under his breath, as he stood with his
back to the fire, looking at Cynthia, and thinking that he had not
done her justice when describing her to the Squire. Now this soft,
almost tuneless whistling, was to Mr. Gibson what purring is to a
cat. He could no more have done it with an anxious case on his mind,
or when he was annoyed by human folly, or when he was hungry, than
he could have flown through the air. Molly knew all this by instinct,
and was happy without being aware of it, as soon as she heard the low
whistle which was no music after all. But Mrs. Gibson did not like
this trick of her husband's; it was not refined she thought, not even
"artistic;" if she could have called it by this fine word it would
have compensated her for the want of refinement. To-night it was
particularly irritating to her nerves; but since her conversation
with Mr. Gibson about Cynthia's engagement, she had not felt herself
in a sufficiently good position to complain.

Mr. Gibson began,--"Well, Cynthia; I've seen the Squire to-day, and
made a clean breast of it."

Cynthia looked up quickly, questioning with her eyes; Molly stopped
her netting to listen; no one spoke.

"You're all to go there on Thursday to lunch; he asked you all, and I
promised for you."

Still no reply; natural, perhaps, but very flat.

"You'll be glad of that, Cynthia, shan't you?" asked Mr. Gibson. "It
may be a little formidable, but I hope it will be the beginning of a
good understanding between you."

"Thank you!" said she, with an effort. "But--but won't it make it
public? I do so wish not to have it known, or talked about, not till
he comes back or close upon the marriage."

"I don't see how it should make it public," said Mr. Gibson. "My
wife goes to lunch with my friend, and takes her daughters with
her--there's nothing in that, is there?"

"I am not sure that I shall go," put in Mrs. Gibson. She did not
know why she said it, for she fully intended to go all the time; but
having said it, she was bound to stick to it for a little while; and,
with such a husband as hers, the hard necessity was sure to fall upon
her of having to find a reason for her saying. Then it came, quick
and sharp.

"Why not?" said he, turning round upon her.

"Oh, because--because I think he ought to have called on Cynthia
first; I've that sort of sensitiveness I can't bear to think of her
being slighted because she is poor."

"Nonsense!" said Mr. Gibson. "I do assure you, no slight whatever
was intended. He does not wish to speak about the engagement to any
one--not even to Osborne--that's your wish, too, isn't it, Cynthia?
Nor does he intend to mention it to any of you when you go there;
but, naturally enough, he wants to make acquaintance with his future
daughter-in-law. If he deviated so much from his usual course as to
come calling here--"

"I am sure I don't want him to come calling here," said Mrs. Gibson,
interrupting. "He was not so very agreeable the only time he did
come. But I am that sort of a character that I cannot put up with
any neglect of persons I love, just because they are not smiled upon
by fortune." She sighed a little ostentatiously as she ended her
sentence.

"Well, then, you won't go!" said Mr. Gibson, provoked, but not
wishing to have a long discussion, especially as he felt his temper
going.

"Do you wish it, Cynthia?" said Mrs. Gibson, anxious for an excuse to
yield.

But her daughter was quite aware of this motive for the question, and
replied quietly,--"Not particularly, mamma. I am quite willing to
refuse the invitation."

"It is already accepted," said Mr. Gibson, almost ready to vow
that he would never again meddle in any affair in which women were
concerned, which would effectually shut him out from all love-affairs
for the future. He had been touched by the Squire's relenting,
pleased with what he had thought would give others pleasure, and this
was the end of it!

"Oh, do go, Cynthia!" said Molly, pleading with her eyes as well as
her words. "Do; I am sure you will like the Squire; and it is such a
pretty place, and he'll be so much disappointed."

"I should not like to give up my dignity," said Cynthia, demurely.
"And you heard what mamma said!"

It was very malicious of her. She fully intended to go, and was
equally sure that her mother was already planning her dress for the
occasion in her own mind. Mr. Gibson, however, who, surgeon though
he was, had never learnt to anatomize a woman's heart, took it all
literally, and was excessively angry both with Cynthia and her
mother; so angry that he did not dare to trust himself to speak. He
went quickly to the door, intending to leave the room; but his wife's
voice arrested him; she said,--

"My dear, do you wish me to go? if you do, I will put my own feelings
on one side."

"Of course I do!" he said, short and stern, and left the room.

"Then I'll go!" said she, in the voice of a victim--those words were
meant for him, but he hardly heard them. "And we'll have a fly from
the 'George,' and get a livery-coat for Thomas, which I've long been
wanting, only dear Mr. Gibson did not like it, but on an occasion
like this I'm sure he won't mind; and Thomas shall go on the box,
and--"

"But, mamma, I've my feelings too," said Cynthia.

"Nonsense, child! when all is so nicely arranged too."

So they went on the day appointed. Mr. Gibson was aware of the change
of plans, and that they were going after all; but he was so much
annoyed by the manner in which his wife had received an invitation
that appeared to him so much kinder than he had expected from his
previous knowledge of the Squire, and his wishes on the subject of
his sons' marriage, that Mrs. Gibson heard neither interest nor
curiosity expressed by her husband as to the visit itself, or the
reception they met with. Cynthia's indifference as to whether the
invitation was accepted or not had displeased Mr. Gibson. He was not
up to her ways with her mother, and did not understand how much of
this said indifference had been assumed in order to countervent Mrs.
Gibson's affectation and false sentiment. But for all his annoyance
on the subject, he was, in fact, very curious to know how the visit
had gone off, and took the first opportunity of being alone with
Molly to question her about the lunch of the day before at Hamley
Hall.

"And so you went to Hamley yesterday after all?"

"Yes; I thought you would have come. The Squire seemed quite to
expect you."

"I thought of going there at first; but I changed my mind like
other people. I don't see why women are to have a monopoly of
changeableness. Well! how did it go off? Pleasantly, I suppose, for
both your mother and Cynthia were in high spirits last night."

"Yes. The dear old Squire was in his best dress and on his best
behaviour, and was so prettily attentive to Cynthia, and she looked
so lovely, walking about with him, and listening to all his talk
about the garden and farm. Mamma was tired, and stopped in-doors, so
they got on very well, and saw a great deal of each other."

"And my little girl trotted behind?"

"Oh, yes. You know I was almost at home, and besides--of course--"
Molly went very red, and left the sentence unfinished.

"Do you think she's worthy of him?" asked her father, just as if she
had completed her speech.

"Of Roger, papa? oh, who is? But she is very sweet, and very, very
charming."

"Very charming if you will, but somehow I don't quite understand her.
Why does she want all this secrecy? Why was she not more eager to go
and pay her duty to Roger's father? She took it as coolly as if I'd
asked her to go to church!"

"I don't think she did take it coolly; I believe I don't quite
understand her either, but I love her dearly all the same."

"Umph; I like to understand people thoroughly, but I know it's not
necessary to women. D'ye really think she's worthy of him?"

"Oh, papa--" said Molly, and then she stopped; she wanted to speak in
favour of Cynthia, but somehow she could form no reply that pleased
her to this repeated inquiry. He did not seem much to care whether he
got an answer or not, for he went on with his own thoughts, and the
result was that he asked Molly if Cynthia had heard from Roger.

"Yes; on Wednesday morning."

"Did she show it to you? But of course not. Besides, I read the
Squire's letter, which told all about him."

Now Cynthia, rather to Molly's surprise, had told her that she might
read the letter if she liked, and Molly had shrunk from availing
herself of the permission, for Roger's sake. She thought that he
would probably have poured out his heart to the one sole person, and
that it was not fair to listen, as it were, to his confidences.

"Was Osborne at home?" asked Mr. Gibson. "The Squire said he did
not think he would have come back; but the young fellow is so
uncertain--"

"No, he was still from home." Then Molly blushed all over crimson,
for it suddenly struck her that Osborne was probably with his
wife--that mysterious wife, of whose existence she was cognizant,
but of whom she knew so little, and of whom her father knew nothing.
Mr. Gibson noticed the blush with anxiety. What did it mean? It was
troublesome enough to find that one of the Squire's precious sons
had fallen in love within the prohibited ranks; and what would not
have to be said and done if anything fresh were to come out between
Osborne and Molly? He spoke out at once to relieve himself of this
new apprehension.

"Molly, I was taken by surprise by this affair between Cynthia and
Roger Hamley--if there's anything more on the tapis let me know at
once, honestly and openly. I know it's an awkward question for you to
reply to; but I wouldn't ask it unless I had good reasons." He took
her hand as he spoke. She looked up at him with clear, truthful eyes,
which filled with tears as she spoke. She did not know why the tears
came; perhaps it was because she was not so strong as formerly.

"If you mean that you're afraid that Osborne thinks of me as Roger
thinks of Cynthia, papa, you are quite mistaken. Osborne and I are
friends and nothing more, and never can be anything more. That's all
I can tell you."

"It's quite enough, little one. It's a great relief. I don't want to
have my Molly carried off by any young man just yet; I should miss
her sadly." He could not help saying this in the fulness of his heart
just then, but he was surprised at the effect these few tender words
produced. Molly threw her arms round his neck, and began to sob
bitterly, her head lying on his shoulder. "There, there!" said he,
patting her on the back, and leading her to the sofa, "that will do.
I get quite enough of tears in the day, shed for real causes, not to
want them at home, where, I hope, they are shed for no cause at all.
There's nothing really the matter, is there, my dear?" he continued,
holding her a little away from him that he might look in her face.
She smiled at him through her tears; and he did not see the look of
sadness which returned to her face after he had left her.

"Nothing, dear, dear papa--nothing now. It is such a comfort to have
you all to myself--it makes me happy."

Mr. Gibson knew all implied in these words, and felt that there was
no effectual help for the state of things which had arisen from his
own act. It was better for them both that they should not speak out
more fully. So he kissed her, and said,--

"That's right, dear! I can leave you in comfort now, and indeed I've
stayed too long already gossiping. Go out and have a walk--take
Cynthia with you, if you like. I must be off. Good-by, little one."

His commonplace words acted like an astringent on Molly's relaxed
feelings. He intended that they should do so; it was the truest
kindness to her; but he walked away from her with a sharp pang at his
heart, which he stunned into numbness as soon as he could by throwing
himself violently into the affairs and cares of others.




CHAPTER XXXVII.

A FLUKE, AND WHAT CAME OF IT.


[Illustration (untitled)]

The honour and glory of having a lover of her own was soon to fall
to Molly's share; though, to be sure, it was a little deduction from
the honour that the man who came with the full intention of proposing
to her, ended by making Cynthia an offer. It was Mr. Coxe, who came
back to Hollingford to follow out the purpose he had announced to Mr.
Gibson nearly two years before, of inducing Molly to become his wife
as soon as he should have succeeded to his uncle's estate. He was now
a rich, though still a red-haired, young man. He came to the George
Inn, bringing his horses and his groom; not that he was going to ride
much, but that he thought such outward signs of his riches might help
on his suit; and he was so justly modest in his estimation of himself
that he believed that he needed all extraneous aid. He piqued himself
on his constancy; and indeed, considering that he had been so much
restrained by his duty, his affection, and his expectations to his
crabbed old uncle, that he had not been able to go much into society,
and very rarely indeed into the company of young ladies, such
fidelity to Molly was very meritorious, at least in his own eyes. Mr.
Gibson too was touched by it, and made it a point of honour to give
him a fair field, all the time sincerely hoping that Molly would not
be such a goose as to lend a willing ear to a youth who could never
remember the difference between apophysis and epiphysis. He thought
it as well not to tell his wife more of Mr. Coxe's antecedents than
that he had been a former pupil; who had relinquished ("all that he
knew of," understood) the medical profession because an old uncle
had left him enough of money to be idle. Mrs. Gibson, who felt that
she had somehow lost her place in her husband's favour, took it into
her head that she could reinstate herself if she was successful
in finding a good match for his daughter Molly. She knew that her
husband had forbidden her to try for this end, as distinctly as
words could express a meaning; but her own words so seldom expressed
her meaning, or if they did, she held to her opinions so loosely,
that she had no idea but that it was the same with other people.
Accordingly she gave Mr. Coxe a very sweet and gracious welcome.

"It is such a pleasure to me to make acquaintance with the former
pupils of my husband. He has spoken to me so often of you that I
quite feel as if you were one of the family, as indeed I am sure that
Mr. Gibson considers you."

Mr. Coxe felt much flattered, and took the words as a happy omen for
his love-affair. "Is Miss Gibson in?" asked he, blushing violently.
"I knew her formerly--that is to say, I lived in the same house
with her, for more than two years, and it would be a great pleasure
to--to--"

"Certainly, I am sure she will be so glad to see you. I sent her
and Cynthia--you don't know my daughter Cynthia, I think, Mr. Coxe?
she and Molly are such great friends--out for a brisk walk this
frosty day, but I think they will soon come back." She went on saying
agreeable nothings to the young man, who received her attentions
with a certain complacency, but was all the time much more engaged
in listening to the well-remembered click at the front door,--the
shutting it to again with household care, and the sound of the
familiar bounding footstep on the stair. At last they came. Cynthia
entered first, bright and blooming, fresh colour in her cheeks and
lips, fresh brilliance in her eyes. She looked startled at the sight
of a stranger, and for an instant she stopped short at the door, as
if taken by surprise. Then in came Molly softly behind her, smiling,
happy, dimpled; but not such a glowing beauty as Cynthia.

"Oh, Mr. Coxe, is it you?" said she, going up to him with an
outstretched hand, and greeting him with simple friendliness.

"Yes; it seems such a long time since I saw you. You are so much
grown--so much--well, I suppose I mustn't say what," he replied,
speaking hurriedly, and holding her hand all the time, rather to
her discomfiture. Then Mrs. Gibson introduced her daughter, and the
two girls spoke of the enjoyment of their walk. Mr. Coxe marred his
cause in that very first interview, if indeed he ever could have
had any chance, by his precipitancy in showing his feelings, and
Mrs. Gibson helped him to mar it by trying to assist him. Molly lost
her open friendliness of manner, and began to shrink away from him
in a way which he thought was a very ungrateful return for all his
faithfulness to her these two years past; and after all she was not
the wonderful beauty his fancy or his love had painted her. That Miss
Kirkpatrick was far more beautiful and much easier of access. For
Cynthia put on all her pretty airs--her look of intent interest in
what any one was saying to her, let the subject be what it would,
as if it was the thing she cared most about in the whole world; her
unspoken deference; in short, all the unconscious ways she possessed
by instinct of tickling the vanity of men. So while Molly quietly
repelled him, Cynthia drew him to her by her soft attractive ways;
and his constancy fell before her charms. He was thankful that he had
not gone too far with Molly, and grateful to Mr. Gibson for having
prohibited all declarations two years ago; for Cynthia, and Cynthia
alone, could make him happy. After a fortnight's time, during which
he had entirely veered round in his allegiance, he thought it
desirable to speak to Mr. Gibson. He did so with a certain sense
of exultation in his own correct behaviour in the affair, but at
the same time feeling rather ashamed of the confession of his own
changeableness which was naturally involved. Now it had so happened
that Mr. Gibson had been unusually little at home during the
fortnight that Mr. Coxe had ostensibly lodged at the "George," but
in reality had spent the greater part of his time at Mr. Gibson's
house--so that he had seen very little of his former pupil, and on
the whole he had thought him improved, especially after Molly's
manner had made her father pretty sure that Mr. Coxe stood no chance
in that quarter. But Mr. Gibson was quite ignorant of the attraction
which Cynthia had had for the young man. If he had perceived it, he
would have nipped it in the bud pretty quickly, for he had no notion
of any girl, even though only partially engaged to one man, receiving
offers from others, if a little plain speaking could prevent it. Mr.
Coxe had asked for a private interview; they were sitting in the old
surgery, now called the consulting-room, but still retaining so much
of its former self as to be the last place in which Mr. Coxe could
feel himself at ease. He was red up to the very roots of his red
hair, and kept turning his glossy new hat round and round in his
fingers, unable to find out the proper way of beginning his sentence,
so at length he plunged in, grammar or no grammar.

"Mr. Gibson, I daresay you'll be surprised, I'm sure I am at--at what
I want to say; but I think it's the part of an honourable man, as you
said yourself, sir, a year or two ago, to--to speak to the father
first, and as you, sir, stand in the place of a father to Miss
Kirkpatrick, I should like to express my feelings, my hopes, or
perhaps I should say wishes, in short--"

"Miss Kirkpatrick?" said Mr. Gibson, a good deal surprised.

"Yes, sir!" continued Mr. Coxe, rushing on now he had got so far. "I
know it may appear inconstant and changeable, but I do assure you, I
came here with a heart as faithful to your daughter as ever beat in a
man's bosom. I most fully intended to offer myself and all that I had
to her acceptance before I left; but really, sir, if you had seen her
manner to me every time I endeavoured to press my suit a little--it
was more than coy, it was absolutely repellent, there could be no
mistaking it,--while Miss Kirkpatrick--" he looked modestly down, and
smoothed the nap of his hat, smiling a little while he did so.

"While Miss Kirkpatrick--?" repeated Mr. Gibson, in such a stern
voice, that Mr. Coxe, landed esquire as he was now, felt as much
discomfited as he used to do when he was an apprentice, and Mr.
Gibson had spoken to him in a similar manner.

"I was only going to say, sir, that so far as one can judge from
manner, and willingness to listen, and apparent pleasure in my
visits--altogether, I think I may venture to hope that Miss
Kirkpatrick is not quite indifferent to me,--and I would wait,--you
have no objection, have you, sir, to my speaking to her, I mean?"
said Mr. Coxe, a little anxious at the expression on Mr. Gibson's
face. "I do assure you I haven't a chance with Miss Gibson," he
continued, not knowing what to say, and fancying that his inconstancy
was rankling in Mr. Gibson's mind.

"No! I don't suppose you have. Don't go and fancy it is that which is
annoying me. You're mistaken about Miss Kirkpatrick, however. I don't
believe she could ever have meant to give you encouragement!"

Mr. Coxe's face grew perceptibly paler. His feelings, if evanescent,
were evidently strong.

"I think, sir, if you could have seen her--I don't consider myself
vain, and manner is so difficult to describe. At any rate, you can
have no objection to my taking my chance, and speaking to her."

"Of course, if you won't be convinced otherwise, I can have no
objection. But if you'll take my advice, you will spare yourself the
pain of a refusal. I may, perhaps, be trenching on confidence, but I
think I ought to tell you that her affections are otherwise engaged."

"It cannot be!" said Mr. Coxe. "Mr. Gibson, there must be some
mistake. I have gone as far as I dared in expressing my feelings,
and her manner has been most gracious. I don't think she could have
misunderstood my meaning. Perhaps she has changed her mind? It is
possible that, after consideration, she has learnt to prefer another,
is it not?"

"By 'another,' you mean yourself, I suppose. I can believe in such
inconstancy" (he could not help, in his own mind, giving a slight
sneer at the instance before him), "but I should be very sorry to
think that Miss Kirkpatrick could be guilty of it."

"But she may--it is a chance. Will you allow me to see her?"

"Certainly, my poor fellow"--for, intermingled with a little
contempt, was a good deal of respect for the simplicity, the
unworldliness, the strength of feeling, even though the feeling was
evanescent--"I will send her to you directly."

"Thank you, sir. God bless you for a kind friend!"

Mr. Gibson went upstairs to the drawing-room, where he was pretty
sure he should find Cynthia. There she was, as bright and careless as
usual, making up a bonnet for her mother, and chattering to Molly as
she worked.

"Cynthia, you will oblige me by going down into my consulting-room at
once. Mr. Coxe wants to speak to you!"

"Mr. Coxe?" said Cynthia. "What can he want with me?"

Evidently, she answered her own question as soon as it was asked, for
she coloured, and avoided meeting Mr. Gibson's severe, uncompromising
look. As soon as she had left the room, Mr. Gibson sat down,
and took up a new _Edinburgh_ lying on the table, as an excuse
for conversation. Was there anything in the article that made
him say, after a minute or two, to Molly, who sat silent and
wondering--"Molly, you must never trifle with the love of an honest
man. You don't know what pain you may give."

Presently Cynthia came back into the drawing-room, looking very
much confused. Most likely she would not have returned if she had
known that Mr. Gibson was still there; but it was such an unheard-of
thing for him to be sitting in that room in the middle of the day,
reading or making pretence to read, that she had never thought of his
remaining. He looked up at her the moment she came in, so there was
nothing for it but putting a bold face on it, and going back to her
work.

"Is Mr. Coxe still downstairs?" asked Mr. Gibson.

"No. He is gone. He asked me to give you both his kind regards. I
believe he is leaving this afternoon." Cynthia tried to make her
manner as commonplace as possible; but she did not look up, and her
voice trembled a little.

Mr. Gibson went on looking at his book for a few minutes; but Cynthia
felt that more was coming, and only wished it would come quickly, for
the severe silence was very hard to bear. It came at last.

"I trust this will never occur again, Cynthia!" said he, in grave
displeasure. "I should not feel satisfied with the conduct of any
girl, however free, who could receive marked attentions from a young
man with complacency, and so lead him on to make an offer which she
never meant to accept. But what must I think of a young woman in
your position, engaged--yet 'accepting most graciously,' for that
was the way Coxe expressed it--the overtures of another man? Do you
consider what unnecessary pain you have given him by your thoughtless
behaviour? I call it thoughtless, but it's the mildest epithet I can
apply to it. I beg that such a thing may not occur again, or I shall
be obliged to characterize it more severely."


[Illustration: "I TRUST THIS WILL NEVER OCCUR AGAIN, CYNTHIA!"]


Molly could not imagine what "more severely" could be, for her
father's manner appeared to her almost cruel in its sternness.
Cynthia coloured up extremely, then went pale, and at length raised
her beautiful appealing eyes full of tears to Mr. Gibson. He was
touched by that look, but he resolved immediately not to be mollified
by any of her physical charms of expression, but to keep to his sober
judgment of her conduct.

"Please, Mr. Gibson, hear my side of the story before you speak so
hardly to me. I did not mean to--to flirt. I merely meant to make
myself agreeable,--I can't help doing that,--and that goose of a Mr.
Coxe seems to have fancied I meant to give him encouragement."

"Do you mean that you were not aware that he was falling in love with
you?" Mr. Gibson was melting into a readiness to be convinced by that
sweet voice and pleading face.

"Well, I suppose I must speak truly." Cynthia blushed and
smiled--ever so little--but it was a smile, and it hardened Mr.
Gibson's heart again. "I did think once or twice that he was becoming
a little more complimentary than the occasion required; but I hate
throwing cold water on people, and I never thought he could take it
into his silly head to fancy himself seriously in love, and to make
such a fuss at the last, after only a fortnight's acquaintance."

"You seem to have been pretty well aware of his silliness (I
should rather call it simplicity). Don't you think you should have
remembered that it might lead him to exaggerate what you were doing
and saying into encouragement?"

"Perhaps. I daresay I'm all wrong, and that he is all right," said
Cynthia, piqued and pouting. "We used to say in France, that '_les
absens ont toujours tort_,' but really it seems as if here--" she
stopped. She was unwilling to be impertinent to a man whom she
respected and liked. She took up another point of her defence, and
rather made matters worse. "Besides, Roger would not allow me to
consider myself as finally engaged to him; I would willingly have
done it, but he would not let me."

"Nonsense. Don't let us go on talking about it, Cynthia! I've said
all that I mean to say. I believe that you were only thoughtless, as
I told you before. But don't let it happen again." He left the room
at once, to put a stop to the conversation, the continuance of which
would serve no useful purpose, and perhaps end by irritating him.

"Not guilty, but we recommend the prisoner not to do it again. It's
pretty much that, isn't it, Molly?" said Cynthia, letting her tears
downfall, even while she smiled. "I do believe your father might make
a good woman of me yet, if he would only take the pains, and wasn't
quite so severe. And to think of that stupid little fellow making all
this mischief! He pretended to take it to heart, as if he had loved
me for years instead of only for days. I daresay only for hours if
the truth were told."

"I was afraid he was becoming very fond of you," said Molly; "at
least it struck me once or twice; but I knew he could not stay long,
and I thought it would only make you uncomfortable if I said anything
about it. But now I wish I had!"

"It wouldn't have made a bit of difference," replied Cynthia. "I knew
he liked me, and I like to be liked; it's born in me to try to make
every one I come near fond of me; but then they shouldn't carry it
too far, for it becomes very troublesome if they do. I shall hate
red-haired people for the rest of my life. To think of such a man as
that being the cause of your father's displeasure with me!"

Molly had a question at her tongue's end that she longed to put; she
knew it was indiscreet, but at last out it came almost against her
will:

"Shall you tell Roger about it?"

Cynthia replied, "I've not thought about it--no! I don't think I
shall--there's no need. Perhaps, if we are ever married--"

"Ever married!" said Molly, under her breath. But Cynthia took no
notice of the exclamation until she had finished the sentence which
it interrupted.

"--and I can see his face and know his mood, I may tell it him then;
but not in writing, and when he is absent; it might annoy him."

"I am afraid it would make him uncomfortable," said Molly,
simply. "And yet it must be so pleasant to be able to tell him
everything--all your difficulties and troubles."

"Yes; only I don't worry him with these things; it's better to
write him merry letters, and cheer him up among the black folk. You
repeated 'Ever married,' a little while ago; do you know, Molly, I
don't think I ever shall be married to him? I don't know why, but I
have a strong presentiment, so it's just as well not to tell him all
my secrets, for it would be awkward for him to know them if it never
came off!"

Molly dropped her work, and sat silent, looking into the future; at
length she said, "I think it would break his heart, Cynthia!"

"Nonsense. Why, I'm sure that Mr. Coxe came here with the intention
of falling in love with you--you needn't blush so violently. I'm sure
you saw it as plainly as I did, only you made yourself disagreeable,
and I took pity on him, and consoled his wounded vanity."

"Can you--do you dare to compare Roger Hamley to Mr. Coxe?" asked
Molly, indignantly.

"No, no, I don't!" said Cynthia in a moment. "They are as different
as men can be. Don't be so dreadfully serious over everything, Molly.
You look as oppressed with sad reproach, as if I had been passing on
to you the scolding your father gave me."

"Because I don't think you value Roger as you ought, Cynthia!" said
Molly stoutly, for it required a good deal of courage to force
herself to say this, although she could not tell why she shrank so
from speaking.

"Yes, I do! It's not in my nature to go into ecstasies, and I don't
suppose I shall ever be what people call 'in love.' But I am glad he
loves me, and I like to make him happy, and I think him the best and
most agreeable man I know, always excepting your father when he isn't
angry with me. What can I say more, Molly? would you like me to say I
think him handsome?"

"I know most people think him plain, but--"

"Well, I'm of the opinion of most people then, and small blame to
them. But I like his face--oh, ten thousand times better than Mr.
Preston's handsomeness!" For the first time during the conversation
Cynthia seemed thoroughly in earnest. Why Mr. Preston was introduced
neither she nor Molly knew; it came up and out by a sudden impulse;
but a fierce look came into the eyes, and the soft lips contracted
themselves as Cynthia named his name. Molly had noticed this look
before, always at the mention of this one person.

"Cynthia, what makes you dislike Mr. Preston so much?"

"Don't you? Why do you ask me? and yet, Molly," said she, suddenly
relaxing into depression, not merely in tone and look, but in the
droop of her limbs--"Molly, what should you think of me if I married
him after all?"

"Married him! Has he ever asked you?"

But Cynthia, instead of replying to this question, went on, uttering
her own thoughts,--"More unlikely things have happened. Have you
never heard of strong wills mesmerizing weaker ones into submission?
One of the girls at Madame Lefevre's went out as a governess to a
Russian family, who lived near Moscow. I sometimes think I'll write
to her to find me a situation in Russia, just to get out of the daily
chance of seeing that man!"

"But sometimes you seem quite intimate with him, and talk to him--"

"How can I help it?" said Cynthia impatiently. Then recovering
herself she added: "We knew him so well at Ashcombe, and he's not a
man to be easily thrown off, I can tell you. I must be civil to him;
it's not from liking, and he knows it's not, for I've told him so.
However, we won't talk about him. I don't know how we came to do it,
I'm sure: the mere fact of his existence, and of his being within
half a mile of us, is bad enough. Oh! I wish Roger was at home,
and rich, and could marry me at once, and carry me away from that
man! If I'd thought of it, I really believe I would have taken poor
red-haired Mr. Coxe."

"I don't understand it at all," said Molly. "I dislike Mr. Preston,
but I should never think of taking such violent steps as you speak
of, to get away from the neighbourhood in which he lives."

"No, because you are a reasonable little darling," said Cynthia,
resuming her usual manner, and coming up to Molly, and kissing her.
"At least you'll acknowledge I'm a good hater!"

"Yes. But still I don't understand it."

"Oh, never mind! There are old complications with our affairs at
Ashcombe. Money matters are at the root of it all. Horrid poverty--do
let us talk of something else! Or, better still, let me go and finish
my letter to Roger, or I shall be too late for the African mail!"

"Isn't it gone? Oh, I ought to have reminded you! It will be too
late. Did you not see the notice at the post-office that letters
ought to be in London on the morning of the 10th instead of the
evening. Oh, I am so sorry!"

"So am I, but it can't be helped. It is to be hoped it will be the
greater treat when he does get it. I've a far greater weight on my
heart, because your father seems so displeased with me. I was fond
of him, and now he is making me quite a coward. You see, Molly,"
continued she, a little piteously, "I've never lived with people with
such a high standard of conduct before; and I don't quite know how to
behave."

"You must learn," said Molly tenderly. "You'll find Roger quite as
strict in his notions of right and wrong."

"Ah, but he's in love with me!" said Cynthia, with a pretty
consciousness of her power. Molly turned away her head, and was
silent; it was of no use combating the truth, and she tried rather
not to feel it--not to feel, poor girl, that she too had a great
weight on her heart, into the cause of which she shrank from
examining. That whole winter long she had felt as if her sun was all
shrouded over with grey mist, and could no longer shine brightly for
her. She wakened up in the morning with a dull sense of something
being wrong; the world was out of joint, and, if she were born to set
it right, she did not know how to do it. Blind herself as she would,
she could not help perceiving that her father was not satisfied with
the wife he had chosen. For a long time Molly had been surprised at
his apparent contentment; sometimes she had been unselfish enough to
be glad that he was satisfied; but still more frequently nature would
have its way, and she was almost irritated at what she considered
his blindness. Something, however, had changed him now: something
that had arisen at the time of Cynthia's engagement. He had become
nervously sensitive to his wife's failings, and his whole manner
had grown dry and sarcastic, not merely to her, but sometimes to
Cynthia,--and even--but this very rarely, to Molly herself. He was
not a man to go into passions, or ebullitions of feeling: they would
have relieved him, even while degrading him in his own eyes; but
he became hard, and occasionally bitter in his speeches and ways.
Molly now learnt to long after the vanished blindness in which her
father had passed the first year of his marriage; yet there were no
outrageous infractions of domestic peace. Some people might say that
Mr. Gibson "accepted the inevitable;" he told himself in more homely
phrase "that it was no use crying over spilt milk:" and he, from
principle, avoided all actual dissensions with his wife, preferring
to cut short a discussion by a sarcasm, or by leaving the room.
Moreover, Mrs. Gibson had a very tolerable temper of her own, and her
cat-like nature purred and delighted in smooth ways, and pleasant
quietness. She had no great facility for understanding sarcasm; it
is true it disturbed her, but as she was not quick at deciphering
any depth of meaning, and felt it unpleasant to think about it, she
forgot it as soon as possible. Yet she saw she was often in some kind
of disfavour with her husband, and it made her uneasy. She resembled
Cynthia in this: she liked to be liked; and she wanted to regain
the esteem which she did not perceive she had lost for ever. Molly
sometimes took her stepmother's part in secret; she felt as if
she herself could never have borne her father's hard speeches so
patiently; they would have cut her to the heart, and she must either
have demanded an explanation, and probed the sore to the bottom, or
sat down despairing and miserable. Instead of which Mrs. Gibson,
after her husband had left the room, on these occasions would say in
a manner more bewildered than hurt--

"I think dear papa seems a little put out to-day; we must see that he
has a dinner that he likes when he comes home. I have often perceived
that everything depends on making a man comfortable in his own
house."

And thus she went on, groping about to find the means of reinstating
herself in his good graces--really trying, according to her lights,
till Molly was often compelled to pity her in spite of herself, and
although she saw that her stepmother was the cause of her father's
increased astringency of disposition. For, indeed, he had got into
that kind of exaggerated susceptibility with regard to his wife's
faults, which may be best typified by the state of bodily irritation
that is produced by the constant recurrence of any particular noise:
those who are brought within hearing of it, are apt to be always on
the watch for the repetition, if they are once made to notice it, and
are in an irritable state of nerves.

So that poor Molly had not passed a cheerful winter, independently of
any private sorrows that she might have in her own heart. She did not
look well, either: she was gradually falling into low health, rather
than bad health. Her heart beat more feebly and slower; the vivifying
stimulant of hope--even unacknowledged hope--was gone out of her
life. It seemed as if there was not, and never could be in this
world, any help for the dumb discordancy between her father and his
wife. Day after day, month after month, year after year, would Molly
have to sympathize with her father, and pity her stepmother, feeling
acutely for both, and certainly more than Mrs. Gibson felt for
herself. Molly could not imagine how she had at one time wished for
her father's eyes to be opened, and how she could ever have fancied
that if they were, he would be able to change things in Mrs. Gibson's
character. It was all hopeless, and the only attempt at a remedy was
to think about it as little as possible. Then Cynthia's ways and
manners about Roger gave Molly a great deal of uneasiness. She did
not believe that Cynthia cared enough for him; at any rate, not with
the sort of love that she herself would have bestowed, if she had
been so happy--no, that was not it--if she had been in Cynthia's
place. She felt as if she should have gone to him both hands held
out, full and brimming over with tenderness, and been grateful for
every word of precious confidence bestowed on her. Yet Cynthia
received his letters with a kind of carelessness, and read them with
a strange indifference, while Molly sat at her feet, so to speak,
looking up with eyes as wistful as a dog's waiting for crumbs, and
such chance beneficences.

She tried to be patient on these occasions, but at last she must
ask--"Where is he, Cynthia? What does he say?" By this time Cynthia
had put down the letter on the table by her, smiling a little from
time to time, as she remembered the loving compliments it contained.

"Where? Oh, I didn't look exactly--somewhere in Abyssinia--Huon. I
can't read the word, and it doesn't much signify, for it would give
me no idea."

"Is he well?" asked greedy Molly.

"Yes, now. He has had a slight touch of fever, he says; but it's all
over now, and he hopes he is getting acclimatized."

"Of fever!--and who took care of him? he would want nursing,--and so
far from home. Oh, Cynthia!"

"Oh, I don't fancy he had any nursing, poor fellow! One doesn't
expect nursing, and hospitals, and doctors in Abyssinia; but he had
plenty of quinine with him, and I suppose that is the best specific.
At any rate he says he is quite well now!"

Molly sat silent for a minute or two.

"What is the date of the letter, Cynthia?"

"I didn't look. December the--December the 10th."

"That's nearly two months ago," said Molly.

"Yes; but I determined I wouldn't worry myself with useless anxiety,
when he went away. If anything did--go wrong, you know," said
Cynthia, using a euphuism for death, as most people do (it is an
ugly word to speak plain out in the midst of life), "it would be all
over before I even heard of his illness, and I could be of no use to
him--could I, Molly?"

"No. I daresay it is all very true; only I should think the Squire
could not take it so easily."

"I always write him a little note when I hear from Roger, but I don't
think I'll name this touch of fever--shall I, Molly?"

"I don't know," said Molly. "People say one ought, but I almost wish
I hadn't heard it. Please, does he say anything else that I may
hear?"

"Oh, lovers' letters are so silly, and I think this is sillier than
usual," said Cynthia, looking over her letter again. "Here's a piece
you may read, from that line to that," indicating two places. "I
haven't read it myself for it looked dullish--all about Aristotle and
Pliny--and I want to get this bonnet-cap made up before we go out to
pay our calls."

Molly took the letter, the thought crossing her mind that he had
touched it, had had his hands upon it, in those far distant desert
lands, where he might be lost to sight and to any human knowledge
of his fate; even now her pretty brown fingers almost caressed the
flimsy paper with their delicacy of touch as she read. She saw
references made to books, which, with a little trouble, would be
accessible to her here in Hollingford. Perhaps the details and the
references would make the letter dull and dry to some people, but not
to her, thanks to his former teaching and the interest he had excited
in her for his pursuits. But, as he said in apology, what had he to
write about in that savage land, but his love, and his researches,
and travels? There was no society, no gaiety, no new books to write
about, no gossip in Abyssinian wilds.

Molly was not in strong health, and perhaps this made her a little
fanciful; but certain it is that her thoughts by day and her dreams
by night were haunted by the idea of Roger lying ill and untended in
those savage lands. Her constant prayer, "O my Lord! give her the
living child, and in no wise slay it," came from a heart as true as
that of the real mother in King Solomon's judgment. "Let him live,
let him live, even though I may never set eyes upon him again. Have
pity upon his father! Grant that he may come home safe, and live
happily with her whom he loves so tenderly--so tenderly, O God." And
then she would burst into tears, and drop asleep at last, sobbing.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

MR. KIRKPATRICK, Q.C.


Cynthia was always the same with Molly: kind, sweet-tempered, ready
to help, professing a great deal of love for her, and probably
feeling as much as she did for any one in the world. But Molly had
reached to this superficial depth of affection and intimacy in the
first few weeks of Cynthia's residence in her father's house; and if
she had been of a nature prone to analyse the character of one whom
she loved dearly, she might have perceived that, with all Cynthia's
apparent frankness, there were certain limits beyond which her
confidence did not go; where her reserve began, and her real self was
shrouded in mystery. For instance, her relations with Mr. Preston
were often very puzzling to Molly. She was sure that there had been a
much greater intimacy between them formerly at Ashcombe, and that the
remembrance of this was often very galling and irritating to Cynthia,
who was as evidently desirous of forgetting it as he was anxious
to make her remember it. But why this intimacy had ceased, why
Cynthia disliked him so extremely now, and many other unexplained
circumstances connected with these two facts, were Cynthia's secrets;
and she effectually baffled all Molly's innocent attempts during
the first glow of her friendship for Cynthia, to learn the girlish
antecedents of her companion's life. Every now and then Molly came
to a dead wall, beyond which she could not pass--at least with the
delicate instruments which were all she chose to use. Perhaps Cynthia
might have told all there was to tell to a more forcible curiosity,
which knew how to improve every slip of the tongue and every fit of
temper to its own gratification. But Molly's was the interest of
affection, not the coarser desire of knowing everything for a little
excitement; and as soon as she saw that Cynthia did not wish to tell
her anything about that period of her life, Molly left off referring
to it. But if Cynthia had preserved a sweet tranquillity of manner
and an unvarying kindness for Molly during the winter of which there
is question, at present she was the only person to whom the beauty's
ways were unchanged. Mr. Gibson's influence had been good for her as
long as she saw that he liked her; she had tried to keep as high a
place in his good opinion as she could, and had curbed many a little
sarcasm against her mother, and many a twisting of the absolute
truth when he was by. Now there was a constant uneasiness about her
which made her more cowardly than before; and even her partisan,
Molly, could not help being aware of the distinct equivocations she
occasionally used when anything in Mr. Gibson's words or behaviour
pressed her too hard. Her repartees to her mother were less frequent
than they had been, but there was often the unusual phenomenon
of pettishness in her behaviour to her. These changes in humour
and disposition, here described all at once, were in themselves a
series of delicate alterations of relative conduct spread over many
months--many winter months of long evenings and bad weather, which
bring out discords of character, as a dash of cold water brings out
the fading colours of an old fresco.

During much of this time Mr. Preston had been at Ashcombe; for Lord
Cumnor had not been able to find an agent whom he liked to replace
Mr. Preston; and while the inferior situation remained vacant Mr.
Preston had undertaken to do the duties of both. Mrs. Goodenough had
had a serious illness; and the little society at Hollingford did not
care to meet while one of their habitual set was scarcely out of
danger. So there had been very little visiting; and though Miss
Browning said that the absence of the temptations of society was very
agreeable to cultivated minds, after the dissipations of the previous
autumn, when there were parties every week to welcome Mr. Preston,
yet Miss Phoebe let out in confidence that she and her sister had
fallen into the habit of going to bed at nine o'clock, for they found
cribbage night after night, from five o'clock till ten, rather too
much of a good thing. To tell the truth, that winter, if peaceful,
was monotonous in Hollingford; and the whole circle of gentility
there was delighted to be stirred up in March by the intelligence
that Mr. Kirkpatrick, the newly-made Q.C., was coming on a visit for
a couple of days to his sister-in-law, Mrs. Gibson. Mrs. Goodenough's
room was the very centre of gossip; gossip had been her daily bread
through her life, gossip was meat and wine to her now.

"Dear-ah-me!" said the old lady, rousing herself so as to sit upright
in her easy-chair, and propping herself with her hands on the arms;
"who would ha' thought she'd such grand relations! Why, Mr. Ashton
told me once that a Queen's counsel was as like to be a judge as a
kitten is like to be a cat. And to think of her being as good as
a sister to a judge! I saw one oncst; and I know I thought as I
shouldn't wish for a better winter-cloak than his old robes would
make me, if I could only find out where I could get 'em second-hand.
And I know she'd her silk gowns turned and dyed and cleaned, and, for
aught I know, turned again, while she lived at Ashcombe. Keeping a
school, too, and so near akin to this Queen's counsel all the time!
Well, to be sure, it wasn't much of a school--only ten young ladies
at the best o' times; so perhaps he never heard of it."

"I've been wondering what they'll give him to dinner," said Miss
Browning. "It is an unlucky time for visitors; no game to be had,
and lamb so late this year, and chicken hardly to be had for love or
money."

"He'll have to put up with calf's head, that he will," said Mrs.
Goodenough, solemnly. "If I'd ha' got my usual health I'd copy out
a receipt of my grandmother's for a rolled calf's head, and send it
to Mrs. Gibson--the doctor has been very kind to me all through this
illness--I wish my daughter in Combermere would send me some autumn
chickens--I'd pass 'em on to the doctor, that I would; but she's been
a-killing of 'em all, and a-sending of them to me, and the last she
sent she wrote me word was the last."

"I wonder if they'll give a party for him!" suggested Miss Phoebe.
"I should like to see a Queen's counsel for once in my life. I have
seen javelin-men, but that's the greatest thing in the legal line I
ever came across."

"They'll ask Mr. Ashton, of course," said Miss Browning. "The three
black graces, Law, Physic, and Divinity, as the song calls them.
Whenever there's a second course, there's always the clergyman of the
parish invited in any family of gentility."

"I wonder if he's married!" said Mrs. Goodenough. Miss Phoebe had
been feeling the same wonder, but had not thought it maidenly to
express it, even to her sister, who was the source of knowledge,
having met Mrs. Gibson in the street on her way to Mrs. Goodenough's.

"Yes, he's married, and must have several children, for Mrs. Gibson
said that Cynthia Kirkpatrick had paid them a visit in London, to
have lessons with her cousins. And she said that his wife was a most
accomplished woman, and of good family, though she brought him no
fortune."

"It's a very creditable connection, I'm sure; it's only a wonder
to me as how we've heard so little talk of it before," said Mrs.
Goodenough. "At the first look of the thing, I shouldn't ha' thought
Mrs. Gibson was one to hide away her fine relations under a bushel;
indeed, for that matter, we're all of us fond o' turning the best
breadth o' the gown to the front. I remember, speaking o' breadths,
how I've undone my skirts many a time and oft to put a stain or a
grease-spot next to poor Mr. Goodenough. He'd a soft kind of heart
when first we was married, and he said, says he, 'Patty, link thy
right arm into my left one, then thou'lt be nearer to my heart;' and
so we kept up the habit, when, poor man, he'd a deal more to think on
than romancing on which side his heart lay; so, as I said, I always
put my damaged breadths on the right hand, and when we walked arm in
arm, as we always did, no one was never the wiser."

"I should not be surprised if he invited Cynthia to pay him another
visit in London," said Miss Browning. "If he did it when he was poor,
he's twenty times more likely to do it now he's a Queen's counsel."

"Ay, work it by the rule o' three, and she stands a good chance. I
only hope it won't turn her head; going up visiting in London at her
age. Why, I was fifty before ever I went!"

"But she has been in France; she's quite a travelled young lady,"
said Miss Phoebe.

Mrs. Goodenough shook her head for a whole minute before she gave
vent to her opinion.

"It's a risk," said she, "a great risk. I don't like saying so to
the doctor, but I shouldn't like having my daughter, if I was him,
so cheek-by-jowl with a girl as was brought up in the country where
Robespierre and Bonyparte was born."

"But Buonaparte was a Corsican," said Miss Browning, who was much
farther advanced both in knowledge and in liberality of opinions than
Mrs. Goodenough. "And there's a great opportunity for cultivation of
the mind afforded by intercourse with foreign countries. I always
admire Cynthia's grace of manner, never too shy to speak, yet never
putting herself forwards; she's quite a help to a party; and if she
has a few airs and graces, why they're natural at her age! Now as for
dear Molly, there's a kind of awkwardness about her--she broke one of
our best china cups last time she was at a party at our house, and
spilt the coffee on the new carpet; and then she got so confused that
she hardly did anything but sit in a corner and hold her tongue all
the rest of the evening."

"She was so sorry for what she'd done, sister," said Miss Phoebe,
in a gentle tone of reproach; she was always faithful to Molly.

"Well, and did I say she wasn't? but was there any need for her to be
stupid all the evening after?"

"But you were rather sharp,--rather displeased--"

"And I think it my duty to be sharp, ay, and cross too, when I see
young folks careless. And when I see my duty clear, I do it; I'm not
one to shrink from it, and they ought to be grateful to me. It's
not every one that will take the trouble of reproving them, as Mrs.
Goodenough knows. I'm very fond of Molly Gibson, very, for her own
sake and for her mother's too; I'm not sure if I don't think she's
worth half-a-dozen Cynthias, but for all that she shouldn't break my
best china teacup, and then sit doing nothing for her livelihood all
the rest of the evening."

By this time Mrs. Goodenough gave evident signs of being tired;
Molly's misdemeanors and Miss Browning's broken teacup were not as
exciting subjects of conversation as Mrs. Gibson's newly-discovered
good luck in having a successful London lawyer for a relation.

Mr. Kirkpatrick had been, like many other men, struggling on in his
profession, and encumbered with a large family of his own; he was
ready to do a good turn for his connections, if it occasioned him no
loss of time, and if (which was, perhaps, a primary condition) he
remembered their existence. Cynthia's visit to Doughty Street nine
or ten years ago had not made much impression upon him after he had
once suggested its feasibility to his good-natured wife. He was even
rather startled every now and then by the appearance of a pretty
little girl amongst his own children, as they trooped in to dessert,
and had to remind himself who she was. But as it was his custom
to leave the table almost immediately and to retreat into a small
back-room called his study, to immerse himself in papers for the rest
of the evening, the child had not made much impression upon him; and
probably the next time he remembered her existence was when Mrs.
Kirkpatrick wrote to him to beg him to receive Cynthia for a night on
her way to school at Boulogne. The same request was repeated on her
return; but it so happened that he had not seen her either time; and
only dimly remembered some remarks which his wife had made on one of
these occasions, that it seemed to her rather hazardous to send so
young a girl so long a journey without making more provision for her
safety than Mrs. Kirkpatrick had done. He knew that his wife would
fill up all deficiencies in this respect as if Cynthia had been her
own daughter; and thought no more about her until he received an
invitation to attend Mrs. Kirkpatrick's wedding with Mr. Gibson, the
highly-esteemed surgeon of Hollingford, &c. &c.--an attention which
irritated instead of pleasing him. "Does the woman think I have
nothing to do but run about the country in search of brides and
bridegrooms, when this great case of Houghton _v._ Houghton is coming
on, and I haven't a moment to spare?" he asked of his wife.

"Perhaps she never heard of it," suggested Mrs. Kirkpatrick.

"Nonsense! the case has been in the papers for days."

"But she mayn't know you are engaged in it."

"She mayn't," said he, meditatively--such ignorance was possible.

But now the great case of Houghton _v._ Houghton was a thing of the
past; the hard struggle was over, the comparative table-land of Q.
C.-dom gained, and Mr. Kirkpatrick had leisure for family feeling and
recollection. One day in the Easter vacation he found himself near
Hollingford; he had a Sunday to spare, and he wrote to offer himself
as a visitor to the Gibsons from Friday till Monday, expressing
strongly (what he really felt, in a less degree,) his wish to make
Mr. Gibson's acquaintance. Mr. Gibson, though often overwhelmed with
professional business, was always hospitable; and moreover, it was
always a pleasure to him to get out of the somewhat confined mental
atmosphere which he had breathed over and over again, and have a
whiff of fresh air: a glimpse of what was passing in the great world
beyond his daily limits of thought and action. So he was ready to
give a cordial welcome to his unknown relation. Mrs. Gibson was
in a flutter of sentimental delight, which she fancied was family
affection, but which might not have been quite so effervescent if Mr.
Kirkpatrick had remained in his former position of struggling lawyer,
with seven children, living in Doughty Street.

When the two gentlemen met they were attracted towards each other
by a similarity of character, with just enough difference in their
opinions to make the experience of each, on which such opinions
were based, valuable to the other. To Mrs. Gibson, although the
bond between them counted for very little in their intercourse, Mr.
Kirkpatrick paid very polite attention; and was, in fact, very glad
that she had done so well for herself as to marry a sensible and
agreeable man, who was able to keep her in comfort, and to behave
to her daughter in so liberal a manner. Molly struck him as a
delicate-looking girl, who might be very pretty if she had a greater
look of health and animation: indeed, looking at her critically,
there were beautiful points about her face--long soft grey eyes,
black curling eyelashes, rarely-showing dimples, perfect teeth;
but there was a languor over all, a slow depression of manner,
which contrasted unfavourably with the brightly-coloured Cynthia,
sparkling, quick, graceful, and witty. As Mr. Kirkpatrick expressed
it afterwards to his wife, he was quite in love with that girl;
and Cynthia, as ready to captivate strangers as any little girl
of three or four, rose to the occasion, forgot all her cares and
despondencies, remembered no longer her regret at having lost
something of Mr. Gibson's good opinion, and listened eagerly and made
soft replies, intermixed with naĽve sallies of droll humour, till
Mr. Kirkpatrick was quite captivated. He left Hollingford, almost
surprised to have performed a duty, and found it a pleasure. For Mrs.
Gibson and Molly he had a general friendly feeling; but he did not
care if he never saw them again. But for Mr. Gibson he had a warm
respect, a strong personal liking, which he should be glad to have
ripen into a friendship, if there was time for it in this bustling
world. And he fully resolved to see more of Cynthia; his wife must
know her; they must have her up to stay with them in London, and show
her something of the world. But, on returning home, Mr. Kirkpatrick
found so much work awaiting him that he had to lock up embryo
friendships and kindly plans in some safe closet of his mind,
and give himself up, body and soul, to the immediate work of his
profession. But, in May, he found time to take his wife to the
Academy Exhibition, and some portrait there striking him as being
like Cynthia, he told his wife more about her and his visit to
Hollingford than he had ever had leisure to do before; and the
result was that on the next day a letter was sent off to Mrs. Gibson,
inviting Cynthia to pay a visit to her cousins in London, and
reminding her of many little circumstances that had occurred when she
was with them as a child, so as to carry on the clue of friendship
from that time to the present.

On its receipt, this letter was greeted in various ways by the four
people who sate round the breakfast-table. Mrs. Gibson read it to
herself first. Then, without telling what its contents were, so that
her auditors were quite in the dark as to what her remarks applied,
she said,--

"I think they might have remembered that I am a generation nearer to
them than she is, but nobody thinks of family affection now-a days;
and I liked him so much, and bought a new cookery-book, all to make
it pleasant and agreeable and what he was used to." She said all this
in a plaintive, aggrieved tone of voice; but as no one knew to what
she was referring, it was difficult to offer her consolation. Her
husband was the first to speak.

"If you want us to sympathize with you, tell us what is the nature of
your woe."

"Why, I daresay it's what he means as a very kind attention, only I
think I ought to have been asked before Cynthia," said she, reading
the letter over again.

"Who's _he_? and what's meant for a 'kind attention'?"

"Mr. Kirkpatrick, to be sure. This letter is from him; and he wants
Cynthia to go and pay them a visit, and never says anything about you
or me, my dear. And I'm sure we did our best to make it pleasant; and
he should have asked us first, I think."

"As I couldn't possibly have gone, it makes very little difference to
me."

"But I could have gone; and, at any rate, he should have paid us
the compliment: it's only a proper mark of respect, you know. So
ungrateful, too, when I gave up my dressing-room on purpose for him!"

"And I dressed for dinner every day he was here, if we are each to
recapitulate all our sacrifices on his behalf. But, for all that, I
didn't expect to be invited to his house. I shall be only too glad if
he will come again to mine."

"I've a great mind not to let Cynthia go," said Mrs. Gibson
reflectively.

"I can't go, mamma," said Cynthia, colouring. "My gowns are all so
shabby, and my old bonnet must do for the summer."

"Well, but you can buy a new one; and I'm sure it is high time you
should get yourself another silk gown. You must have been saving up a
great deal, for I don't know when you've had any new clothes."

Cynthia began to say something, but stopped short. She went on
buttering her toast, but she held it in her hand without eating it;
without looking up either, as, after a minute or two of silence, she
spoke again:--

"I cannot go. I should like it very much; but I really cannot go.
Please, mamma, write at once, and refuse it."

"Nonsense, child! When a man in Mr. Kirkpatrick's position comes
forward to offer a favour, it does not do to decline it without
giving a sufficient reason. So kind of him as it is, too!"

"Suppose you offer to go instead of me?" proposed Cynthia.

"No, no! that won't do," said Mr. Gibson, decidedly. "You can't
transfer invitations in that way. But, really, this excuse about your
clothes does appear to be very trivial, Cynthia, if you have no other
reason to give."

"It is a real, true reason to me," said Cynthia, looking up at him
as she spoke. "You must let me judge for myself. It would not do
to go there in a state of shabbiness, for even in Doughty Street,
I remember, my aunt was very particular about dress; and now that
Margaret and Helen are grown up, and they visit so much,--pray don't
say anything more about it, for I know it would not do."

"What have you done with all your money, I wonder?" said Mrs. Gibson.
"You've twenty pounds a year, thanks to Mr. Gibson and me; and I'm
sure you haven't spent more than ten."

"I hadn't many things when I came back from France," said Cynthia, in
a low voice, and evidently troubled by all this questioning. "Pray
let it be decided at once; I can't go, and there's an end of it." She
got up, and left the room rather suddenly.

"I don't understand it at all," said Mrs. Gibson. "Do you, Molly?"

"No. I know she doesn't like spending money on her dress, and is very
careful." Molly said this much, and then was afraid she had made
mischief.

"But then she must have got the money somewhere. It always has struck
me that if you have not extravagant habits, and do not live up to
your income, you must have a certain sum to lay by at the end of the
year. Have I not often said so, Mr. Gibson?"

"Probably."

"Well, then, apply the same reasoning to Cynthia's case; and then, I
ask, what has become of the money?"

"I cannot tell," said Molly, seeing that she was appealed to. "She
may have given it away to some one who wants it."

Mr. Gibson put down his newspaper.

"It's very clear that she has neither got the dress nor the money
necessary for this London visit, and that she doesn't want any more
inquiries to be made on the subject. She likes mysteries, in fact,
and I detest them. Still, I think it's a desirable thing for her to
keep up the acquaintance, or friendship, or whatever it is to be
called, with her father's family; and I shall gladly give her ten
pounds; and if that's not enough, why, either you must help her out,
or she must do without some superfluous article of dress or another."

"I'm sure there never was such a kind, dear, generous man as you are,
Mr. Gibson," said his wife. "To think of your being a stepfather!
and so good to my poor fatherless girl! But, Molly my dear, I
think you'll acknowledge that you too are very fortunate in your
stepmother. Are not you, love? And what happy _tÉte-ł-tÉtes_ we shall
have together when Cynthia goes to London! I'm not sure if I don't
get on better with you even than with her, though she is my own
child; for, as dear papa says so truly, there is a love of mystery
about her; and if I hate anything, it is the slightest concealment
or reserve. Ten pounds! Why, it will quite set her up, buy her a
couple of gowns and a new bonnet, and I don't know what all! Dear Mr.
Gibson, how generous you are!"

Something very like "Pshaw!" was growled out from behind the
newspaper.

"May I go and tell her?" said Molly, rising up.

"Yes, do, love. Tell her it would be so ungrateful to refuse; and
tell her that your father wishes her to go; and tell her, too, that
it would be quite wrong not to avail herself of an opening which may
by-and-by be extended to the rest of the family. I am sure if they
ask me--which certainly they ought to do--I won't say before they
asked Cynthia, because I never think of myself, and am really the
most forgiving person in the world, in forgiving slights;--but when
they do ask me, which they are sure to do, I shall never be content
till, by putting in a little hint here and a little hint there, I've
induced them to send you an invitation. A month or two in London
would do you so much good, Molly."

Molly had left the room before this speech was ended, and Mr. Gibson
was occupied with his newspaper; but Mrs. Gibson finished it to
herself very much to her own satisfaction; for, after all, it was
better to have some one of the family going on the visit, though she
might not be the right person, than to refuse it altogether, and
never to have the opportunity of saying anything about it. As Mr.
Gibson was so kind to Cynthia, she too would be kind to Molly, and
dress her becomingly, and invite young men to the house; do all
the things, in fact, which Molly and her father did not want to
have done, and throw the old stumbling-blocks in the way of their
unrestrained intercourse, which was the one thing they desired to
have, free and open, and without the constant dread of her jealousy.




CHAPTER XXXIX.

SECRET THOUGHTS OOZE OUT.


Molly found Cynthia in the drawing-room, standing in the bow-window,
looking out on the garden. She started as Molly came up to her.

"Oh, Molly," said she, putting her arms out towards her, "I am always
so glad to have you with me!"

It was outbursts of affection such as these that always called
Molly back, if she had been ever so unconsciously wavering in her
allegiance to Cynthia. She had been wishing downstairs that Cynthia
would be less reserved, and not have so many secrets; but now it
seemed almost like treason to have wanted her to be anything but what
she was. Never had any one more than Cynthia the power spoken of by
Goldsmith when he wrote--

	He threw off his friends like a huntsman his pack,
	For he knew when he liked he could whistle them back.

"Do you know, I think you'll be glad to hear what I've got to tell
you," said Molly. "I think you would really like to go to London;
shouldn't you?"

"Yes, but it's of no use liking," said Cynthia. "Don't you begin
about it, Molly, for the thing is settled; and I can't tell you why,
but I can't go."

"It is only the money, dear. And papa has been so kind about it. He
wants you to go; he thinks you ought to keep up relationships; and he
is going to give you ten pounds."

"How kind he is!" said Cynthia. "But I ought not to take it. I wish I
had known you years ago; I should have been different to what I am."

"Never mind that! We like you as you are; we don't want you
different. You'll really hurt papa if you don't take it. Why do you
hesitate? Do you think Roger won't like it?"

"Roger! no, I wasn't thinking about him! Why should he care? I shall
be there and back again before he even hears about it."

"Then you will go?" said Molly.

Cynthia thought for a minute or two. "Yes, I will," said she, at
length. "I daresay it's not wise; but it will be pleasant, and I'll
go. Where is Mr. Gibson? I want to thank him. Oh, how kind he is!
Molly, you're a lucky girl!"

"I?" said Molly, quite startled at being told this; for she had been
feeling as if so many things were going wrong, almost as if they
would never go right again.

"There he is!" said Cynthia. "I hear him in the hall!" And down
she flew, and laying her hands on Mr. Gibson's arm, she thanked
him with such warm impulsiveness, and in so pretty and caressing a
manner, that something of his old feeling of personal liking for her
returned, and he forgot for a time the causes of disapproval he had
against her.

"There, there!" said he, "that's enough, my dear! It's quite right
you should keep up with your relations; there's nothing more to be
said about it."

"I do think your father is the most charming man I know," said
Cynthia, on her return to Molly; "and it's that which always makes
me so afraid of losing his good opinion, and fret so when I think he
is displeased with me. And now let us think all about this London
visit. It will be delightful, won't it? I can make ten pounds go ever
so far; and in some ways it will be such a comfort to get out of
Hollingford."

"Will it?" said Molly, rather wistfully.

"Oh, yes! You know I don't mean that it will be a comfort to leave
you; that will be anything but a comfort. But, after all, a country
town is a country town, and London is London. You need not smile at
my truisms; I've always had a sympathy with M. de la Palisse,--

   M. de la Palisse est mort
      En perdant sa vie;
   Un quart d'heure avant sa mort
      Il Ätait en vie,"

sang she, in so gay a manner that she puzzled Molly, as she often
did, by her change of mood from the gloomy decision with which she
had refused to accept the invitation only half an hour ago. She
suddenly took Molly round the waist, and began waltzing round the
room with her, to the imminent danger of the various little tables,
loaded with "_objets d'art_" (as Mrs. Gibson delighted to call them)
with which the drawing-room was crowded. She avoided them, however,
with her usual skill; but they both stood still at last, surprised
at Mrs. Gibson's surprise, as she stood at the door, looking at the
whirl going on before her.

"Upon my word, I only hope you are not going crazy, both of you!
What's all this about, pray?"

"Only because I'm so glad I'm going to London, mamma," said Cynthia,
demurely.

"I'm not sure if it's quite the thing for an engaged young lady to
be so much beside herself at the prospect of gaiety. In my time, our
great pleasure in our lovers' absence was in thinking about them."

"I should have thought that would have given you pain, because you
would have had to remember that they were away, which ought to have
made you unhappy. Now, to tell you the truth, just at the moment I
had forgotten all about Roger. I hope it wasn't very wrong. Osborne
looks as if he did all my share as well as his own of the fretting
after Roger. How ill he looked yesterday!"

"Yes," said Molly; "I didn't know if any one besides me had noticed
it. I was quite shocked."

"Ah," said Mrs. Gibson, "I'm afraid that young man won't live
long--very much afraid," and she shook her head ominously.

"Oh, what will happen if he dies!" exclaimed Molly, suddenly sitting
down, and thinking of that strange, mysterious wife who never made
her appearance, whose very existence was never spoken about--and
Roger away too!

"Well, it would be very sad, of course, and we should all feel it
very much, I've no doubt; for I've always been very fond of Osborne;
in fact, before Roger became, as it were, my own flesh and blood, I
liked Osborne better: but we must not forget the living, dear Molly,"
(for Molly's eyes were filling with tears at the dismal thoughts
presented to her). "Our dear good Roger would, I am sure, do all in
his power to fill Osborne's place in every way; and his marriage need
not be so long delayed."

"Don't speak of that in the same breath as Osborne's life, mamma,"
said Cynthia, hastily.

"Why, my dear, it is a very natural thought. For poor Roger's sake,
you know, one wishes it not to be so very, very long an engagement;
and I was only answering Molly's question, after all. One can't help
following out one's thoughts. People must die, you know--young, as
well as old."

"If I ever suspected Roger of following out his thoughts in a similar
way," said Cynthia, "I'd never speak to him again."

"As if he would!" said Molly, warm in her turn. "You know he never
would; and you shouldn't suppose it of him, Cynthia--no, not even for
a moment!"

"I can't see the great harm of it all, for my part," said Mrs.
Gibson, plaintively. "A young man strikes us all as looking very
ill--and I'm sure I'm sorry for it; but illness very often leads to
death. Surely you agree with me there, and what's the harm of saying
so? Then Molly asks what will happen if he dies; and I try to answer
her question. I don't like talking or thinking of death any more than
any one else; but I should think myself wanting in strength of mind
if I could not look forward to the consequences of death. I really
think we're commanded to do so, somewhere in the Bible or the
Prayer-book."

"Do you look forward to the consequences of my death, mamma?" asked
Cynthia.

"You really are the most unfeeling girl I ever met with," said Mrs.
Gibson, really hurt. "I wish I could give you a little of my own
sensitiveness, for I have too much for my happiness. Don't let us
speak of Osborne's looks again; ten to one it was only some temporary
over-fatigue, or some anxiety about Roger, or perhaps a little fit
of indigestion. I was very foolish to attribute it to anything more
serious, and dear papa might be displeased if he knew I had done
so. Medical men don't like other people to be making conjectures
about health; they consider it as trenching on their own particular
province, and very proper, I'm sure. Now let us consider about your
dress, Cynthia; I could not understand how you had spent your money,
and made so little show with it."

"Mamma! it may sound very cross, but I must tell Molly, and you, and
everybody, once for all, that as I don't want and didn't ask for more
than my allowance, I'm not going to answer any questions about what
I do with it." She did not say this with any want of respect; but she
said it with quiet determination, which subdued her mother for the
time; though often afterwards, when Mrs. Gibson and Molly were alone,
the former would start the wonder as to what Cynthia could possibly
have done with her money, and hunt each poor conjecture through woods
and valleys of doubt, till she was wearied out; and the exciting
sport was given up for the day. At present, however, she confined
herself to the practical matter in hand; and the genius for millinery
and dress, inherent in both mother and daughter, soon settled a great
many knotty points of contrivance and taste, and then they all three
set to work to "gar auld claes look amaist as weel's the new."

Cynthia's relations with the Squire had been very stationary ever
since the visit she had paid to the Hall the previous autumn. He had
received them all at that time with hospitable politeness, and he
had been more charmed with Cynthia than he liked to acknowledge to
himself when he thought the visit all over afterwards.

"She's a pretty lass, sure enough," thought he, "and has pretty ways
about her too, and likes to learn from older people, which is a good
sign; but somehow I don't like madam her mother; but still she is her
mother, and the girl's her daughter; yet she spoke to her once or
twice as I shouldn't ha' liked our little Fanny to have spoken, if
it had pleased God for her to ha' lived. No, it's not the right way,
and it may be a bit old-fashioned, but I like the right way. And then
again she took possession o' me, as I may say, and little Molly had
to run after us in the garden walks that are too narrow for three,
just like a little four-legged doggie; and the other was so full of
listening to me, she never turned round for to speak a word to Molly.
I don't mean to say they're not fond of each other, and that's in
Roger's sweetheart's favour; and it's very ungrateful in me to go and
find fault with a lass who was so civil to me, and had such a pretty
way with her of hanging on every word that fell from my lips. Well!
a deal may come and go in two years! and the lad says nothing to me
about it. I'll be as deep as him, and take no more notice of the
affair till he comes home and tells me himself."

So although the Squire was always delighted to receive the little
notes which Cynthia sent him every time she heard from Roger, and
although this attention on her part was melting the heart he tried
to harden, he controlled himself into writing her the briefest
acknowledgments. His words were strong in meaning, but formal
in expression; she herself did not think much about them, being
satisfied to do the kind actions that called them forth. But her
mother criticised them and pondered them. She thought she had hit
on the truth when she decided in her own mind that it was a very
old-fashioned style, and that he and his house and his furniture
all wanted some of the brightening up and polishing which they were
sure to receive, when--she never quite liked to finish the sentence
definitely, although she kept repeating to herself that "there was no
harm in it."

To return to the Squire. Occupied as he now was, he recovered his
former health, and something of his former cheerfulness. If Osborne
had met him half-way, it is probable that the old bond between father
and son might have been renewed; but Osborne either was really an
invalid, or had sunk into invalid habits, and made no effort to
rally. If his father urged him to go out--nay, once or twice he
gulped down his pride, and asked Osborne to accompany him--Osborne
would go to the window and find out some flaw or speck in the wind
or weather, and make that an excuse for stopping in-doors over his
books. He would saunter out on the sunny side of the house in a
manner that the Squire considered as both indolent and unmanly. Yet
if there was a prospect of his leaving home, which he did pretty
often about this time, he was seized with a hectic energy: the clouds
in the sky, the easterly wind, the dampness of the air, were nothing
to him then; and as the Squire did not know the real secret cause
of this anxiety to be gone, he took it into his head that it arose
from Osborne's dislike to Hamley and to the monotony of his father's
society.

"It was a mistake," thought the Squire. "I see it now. I was never
great at making friends myself: I always thought those Oxford and
Cambridge men turned up their noses at me for a country booby, and
I'd get the start and have none o' them. But when the boys went to
Rugby and Cambridge, I should ha' let them have had their own friends
about 'em, even though they might ha' looked down on me; it was the
worst they could ha' done to me; and now what few friends I had have
fallen off from me, by death or somehow, and it is but dreary work
for a young man, I grant it. But he might try not to show it so plain
to me as he does. I'm getting case-hardened, but it does cut me to
the quick sometimes--it does. And he so fond of his dad as he was
once! If I can but get the land drained I'll make him an allowance,
and let him go to London, or where he likes. Maybe he'll do better
this time, or maybe he'll go to the dogs altogether; but perhaps it
will make him think a bit kindly of the old father at home--I should
like him to do that, I should!"

It is possible that Osborne might have been induced to tell his
father of his marriage during their long solitary intercourse, if the
Squire, in an unlucky moment, had not given him his confidence about
Roger's engagement with Cynthia. It was on one wet Sunday afternoon,
when the father and son were sitting together in the large empty
drawing-room. Osborne had not been to church in the morning; the
Squire had, and he was now trying hard to read one of Blair's
sermons. They had dined early; they always did on Sundays; and either
that, or the sermon, or the hopeless wetness of the day, made the
afternoon seem interminably long to the Squire. He had certain
unwritten rules for the regulation of his conduct on Sundays. Cold
meat, sermon-reading, no smoking till after evening prayers, as
little thought as possible as to the state of the land and the
condition of the crops, and as much respectable sitting in-doors in
his best clothes as was consistent with going to church twice a day,
and saying the responses louder than the clerk. To-day it had rained
so unceasingly that he had remitted the afternoon church; but oh,
even with the luxury of a nap, how long it seemed before he saw the
Hall servants trudging homewards, along the field-path, a covey of
umbrellas! He had been standing at the window for the last half-hour,
his hands in his pockets, and his mouth often contracting itself into
the traditional sin of a whistle, but as often checked into sudden
gravity--ending, nine times out of ten, in a yawn. He looked askance
at Osborne, who was sitting near the fire absorbed in a book. The
poor Squire was something like the little boy in the child's story,
who asks all sorts of birds and beasts to come and play with him;
and, in every case, receives the sober answer, that they are too busy
to have leisure for trivial amusements. The father wanted the son to
put down his book, and talk to him: it was so wet, so dull, and a
little conversation would so wile away the time! But Osborne, with
his back to the window where his father was standing, saw nothing
of all this, and went on reading. He had assented to his father's
remark that it was a very wet afternoon, but had not carried on the
subject into all the varieties of truisms of which it was susceptible.
Something more rousing must be started, and this the Squire felt. The
recollection of the affair between Roger and Cynthia came into his
head, and, without giving it a moment's consideration, he began,--

"Osborne! Do you know anything about this--this attachment of
Roger's?"

Quite successful. Osborne laid down his book in a moment, and turned
round to his father.

"Roger! an attachment! No! I never heard of it--I can hardly believe
it--that is to say, I suppose it is to--"

And then he stopped; for he thought he had no right to betray his own
conjecture that the object was Cynthia Kirkpatrick.

"Yes. He is though. Can you guess who to? Nobody that I particularly
like--not a connection to my mind--yet she's a very pretty girl; and
I suppose I was to blame in the first instance."

"Is it--?"

"It's no use beating about the bush. I've gone so far, I may as well
tell you all. It's Miss Kirkpatrick, Gibson's stepdaughter. But it's
not an engagement, mind you--"

"I'm very glad--I hope she likes Roger back again--"

"Like--it's only too good a connection for her not to like it: if
Roger is of the same mind when he comes home, I'll be bound she'll be
only too happy!"

"I wonder Roger never told me," said Osborne, a little hurt, now he
began to consider himself.

"He never told me either," said the Squire. "It was Gibson, who came
here, and made a clean breast of it, like a man of honour. I'd been
saying to him, I couldn't have either of you two lads taking up with
his lasses. I'll own it was you I was afraid of--it's bad enough with
Roger, and maybe will come to nothing after all; but if it had been
you, I'd ha' broken with Gibson and every mother's son of 'em, sooner
than have let it go on; and so I told Gibson."

"I beg your pardon for interrupting you, but, once for all, I claim
the right of choosing my wife for myself, subject to no man's
interference," said Osborne, hotly.

"Then you'll keep your wife with no man's interference, that's all;
for ne'er a penny will you get from me, my lad, unless you marry to
please me a little, as well as yourself a great deal. That's all I
ask of you. I'm not particular as to beauty, or as to cleverness, and
piano-playing, and that sort of thing; if Roger marries this girl, we
shall have enough of that in the family. I shouldn't much mind her
being a bit older than you, but she must be well-born, and the more
money she brings the better for the old place."

"I say again, father, I choose my wife for myself, and I don't admit
any man's right of dictation."

"Well, well!" said the Squire, getting a little angry in his turn.
"If I'm not to be father in this matter, thou sha'n't be son. Go
against me in what I've set my heart on, and you'll find there's the
devil to pay, that's all. But don't let us get angry, it's Sunday
afternoon for one thing, and it's a sin; and besides that, I've not
finished my story."

For Osborne had taken up his book again, and under pretence of
reading, was fuming to himself. He hardly put it away even at his
father's request.

"As I was saying, Gibson said, when first we spoke about it, that
there was nothing on foot between any of you four, and that if there
was, he would let me know; so by-and-by he comes and tells me of
this."

"Of what--I don't understand how far it has gone?"

There was a tone in Osborne's voice the Squire did not quite like;
and he began answering rather angrily.

"Of this, to be sure--of what I'm telling you--of Roger going and
making love to this girl, that day he left, after he had gone away
from here, and was waiting for the 'Umpire' in Hollingford. One would
think you quite stupid at times, Osborne."

"I can only say that these details are quite new to me; you never
mentioned them before, I assure you."

"Well; never mind whether I did or not. I'm sure I said Roger was
attached to Miss Kirkpatrick, and be hanged to her; and you might
have understood all the rest as a matter of course."

"Possibly," said Osborne, politely. "May I ask if Miss Kirkpatrick,
who appeared to me to be a very nice girl, responds to Roger's
affection?"

"Fast enough, I'll be bound," said the Squire, sulkily. "A Hamley of
Hamley isn't to be had every day. Now, I'll tell you what, Osborne,
you're the only marriageable one left in the market, and I want to
hoist the old family up again. Don't go against me in this; it really
will break my heart if you do."

"Father, don't talk so," said Osborne. "I'll do anything I can to
oblige you, except--"

"Except the only thing I've set my heart on your doing."

"Well, well, let it alone for the present. There's no question of my
marrying just at this moment. I'm out of health, and I'm not up to
going into society, and meeting young ladies and all that sort of
thing, even if I had an opening into fitting society."

"You should have an opening fast enough. There'll be more money
coming in, in a year or two, please God. And as for your health, why,
what's to make you well, if you cower over the fire all day, and
shudder away from a good honest tankard as if it were poison?"

"So it is to me," said Osborne, languidly, playing with his book as
if he wanted to end the conversation and take it up again. The Squire
saw the movements, and understood them.

"Well," said he, "I'll go and have a talk with Will about poor old
Black Bess. It's Sunday work enough, asking after a dumb animal's
aches and pains."

But after his father had left the room Osborne did not take up his
book again. He laid it down on the table by him, leant back in his
chair, and covered his eyes with his hand. He was in a state of
health which made him despondent about many things, though, least
of all, about what was most in danger. The long concealment of his
marriage from his father made the disclosure of it far, far more
difficult than it would have been at first. Unsupported by Roger, how
could he explain it all to one so passionate as the Squire? how tell
of the temptation, the stolen marriage, the consequent happiness, and
alas! the consequent suffering?--for Osborne had suffered, and did
suffer, greatly in the untoward circumstances in which he had placed
himself. He saw no way out of it all, excepting by the one strong
stroke of which he felt himself incapable. So with a heavy heart he
addressed himself to his book again. Everything seemed to come in his
way, and he was not strong enough in character to overcome obstacles.
The only overt step he took in consequence of what he had heard from
his father, was to ride over to Hollingford the first fine day after
he had received the news, and go to see Cynthia and the Gibsons. He
had not been there for a long time; bad weather and languor combined
had prevented him. He found them full of preparations and discussions
about Cynthia's visit to London; and she herself not at all in
the sentimental mood proper to respond to his delicate intimations
of how glad he was in his brother's joy. Indeed, it was so long
after the time, that Cynthia scarcely perceived that to him the
intelligence was recent, and that the first bloom of his emotions
had not yet passed away. With her head a little on one side,
she was contemplating the effect of a knot of ribbons, when he
began, in a low whisper, and leaning forward towards her as he
spoke,--"Cynthia--I may call you Cynthia now, mayn't I?--I'm so glad
of this news; I've only just heard of it, but I'm so glad!"

"What news do you mean?" She had her suspicions; but she was annoyed
to think that from one person her secret was passing to another and
another, till, in fact, it was becoming no secret at all. Still,
Cynthia could always conceal her annoyance when she chose. "Why are
you to begin calling me Cynthia now?" she went on, smiling. "The
terrible word has slipped out from between your lips before, do you
know?"

This light way of taking his tender congratulation did not quite
please Osborne, who was in a sentimental mood, and for a minute or so
he remained silent. Then, having finished making her bow of ribbon,
she turned to him, and continued in a quick low voice, anxious to
take advantage of a conversation between her mother and Molly,--

"I think I can guess why you made that pretty little speech just
now. But do you know you ought not to have been told? And, moreover,
things are not quite arrived at the solemnity of--of--well--an
engagement. He would not have it so. Now, I sha'n't say any more; and
you must not. Pray remember you ought not to have known; it is my
own secret, and I particularly wished it not to be spoken about; and
I don't like its being so talked about. Oh, the leaking of water
through one small hole!"

And then she plunged into the talk of the other two, making the
conversation general. Osborne was rather discomfited at the
non-success of his congratulations; he had pictured to himself the
unbosoming of a love-sick girl, full of rapture, and glad of a
sympathizing confidant. He little knew Cynthia's nature. The more she
suspected that she was called upon for a display of emotion, the less
would she show; and her emotions were generally under the control of
her will. He had made an effort to come and see her; and now he leant
back in his chair, weary and a little dispirited.

"You poor dear young man," said Mrs. Gibson, coming up to him with
her soft, soothing manner; "how tired you look! Do take some of that
eau-de-Cologne and bathe your forehead. This spring weather overcomes
me too. 'Primavera' I think the Italians call it. But it is very
trying for delicate constitutions, as much from its associations as
from its variableness of temperature. It makes me sigh perpetually;
but then I am so sensitive. Dear Lady Cumnor always used to say I was
like a thermometer. You've heard how ill she has been?"

"No," said Osborne, not very much caring either.

"Oh, yes, she is better now; but the anxiety about her has tried me
so: detained here by what are, of course, my duties, but far away
from all intelligence, and not knowing what the next post might
bring."

"Where was she then?" asked Osborne, becoming a little more
sympathetic.

"At Spa. Such a distance off! Three days' post! Can't you conceive
the trial? Living with her as I did for years; bound up in the family
as I was."

"But Lady Harriet said, in her last letter, that they hoped she would
be stronger than she had been for years," said Molly, innocently.

"Yes--Lady Harriet--of course--every one who knows Lady Harriet knows
that she is of too sanguine a temperament for her statements to be
perfectly relied on. Altogether--strangers are often deluded by Lady
Harriet--she has an off-hand manner which takes them in; but she does
not mean half she says."

"We will hope she does in this instance," said Cynthia, shortly.
"They're in London now, and Lady Cumnor hasn't suffered from the
journey."

"They say so," said Mrs. Gibson, shaking her head, and laying an
emphasis on the word "say." "I am perhaps over-anxious, but I wish--I
wish I could see and judge for myself. It would be the only way of
calming my anxiety. I almost think I shall go up with you, Cynthia,
for a day or two, just to see her with my own eyes. I don't quite
like your travelling alone either. We will think about it, and you
shall write to Mr. Kirkpatrick, and propose it, if we determine upon
it. You can tell him of my anxiety; and it will be only sharing your
bed for a couple of nights."




CHAPTER XL.

MOLLY GIBSON BREATHES FREELY.


That was the way in which Mrs. Gibson first broached her intention
of accompanying Cynthia up to London for a few days' visit. She had
a trick of producing the first sketch of any new plan before an
outsider to the family circle; so that the first emotions of others,
if they disapproved of her projects, had to be repressed, until the
idea had become familiar to them. To Molly it seemed too charming
a proposal ever to come to pass. She had never allowed herself to
recognize the restraint she was under in her stepmother's presence;
but all at once she found it out when her heart danced at the idea
of three whole days--for that it would be at the least--of perfect
freedom of intercourse with her father; of old times come back again;
of meals without perpetual fidgetiness after details of ceremony and
correctness of attendance.

"We'll have bread-and-cheese for dinner, and eat it on our knees;
we'll make up for having had to eat sloppy puddings with a fork
instead of a spoon all this time, by putting our knives in our mouths
till we cut ourselves. Papa shall pour his tea into his saucer if
he's in a hurry; and if I'm thirsty, I'll take the slop-basin. And
oh, if I could but get, buy, borrow, or steal any kind of an old
horse; my grey skirt isn't new, but it will do;--that would be too
delightful! After all, I think I can be happy again; for months and
months it has seemed as if I had got too old ever to feel pleasure,
much less happiness again."

So thought Molly. Yet she blushed, as if with guilt, when Cynthia,
reading her thoughts, said to her one day,--

"Molly, you're very glad to get rid of us, are not you?"

"Not of you, Cynthia; at least, I don't think I am. Only, if you but
knew how I love papa, and how I used to see a great deal more of him
than I ever do now--"

"Ah! I often think what interlopers we must seem, and are in fact--"

"I don't feel you as such. You, at any rate, have been a new delight
to me--a sister; and I never knew how charming such a relationship
could be."

"But mamma?" said Cynthia, half-suspiciously, half-sorrowfully.

"She is papa's wife," said Molly, quietly. "I don't mean to say I'm
not often very sorry to feel I'm no longer first with him; but it
was"--the violent colour flushed into her face till even her eyes
burnt, and she suddenly found herself on the point of crying; the
weeping ash-tree, the misery, the slow dropping comfort, and the
comforter came all so vividly before her--"it was Roger!"--she went
on looking up at Cynthia, as she overcame her slight hesitation at
mentioning his name--"Roger, who told me how I ought to take papa's
marriage, when I was first startled and grieved at the news. Oh,
Cynthia, what a great thing it is to be loved by him!"

Cynthia blushed, and looked fluttered and pleased.

"Yes, I suppose it is. At the same time, Molly, I'm afraid he'll
expect me to be always as good as he fancies me now, and I shall have
to walk on tiptoe all the rest of my life."

"But you are good, Cynthia," put in Molly.

"No, I'm not. You're just as much mistaken as he is; and some day I
shall go down in your opinions with a run, just like the hall clock
the other day when the spring broke."

"I think he'll love you just as much," said Molly.

"Could you? Would you be my friend if--if it turned out ever that I
had done very wrong things? Would you remember how very difficult it
has sometimes been to me to act rightly?" (she took hold of Molly's
hand as she spoke). "We won't speak of mamma, for your sake as much
as mine or hers; but you must see she isn't one to help a girl with
much good advice, or good-- Oh, Molly, you don't know how I was
neglected just at a time when I wanted friends most. Mamma does not
know it; it is not in her to know what I might have been if I had
only fallen into wise, good hands. But I know it; and what's more,"
continued she, suddenly ashamed of her unusual exhibition of feeling,
"I try not to care, which I daresay is really the worst of all; but I
could worry myself to death if I once took to serious thinking."

"I wish I could help you, or even understand you," said Molly, after
a moment or two of sad perplexity.

"You can help me," said Cynthia, changing her manner abruptly. "I can
trim bonnets, and make head-dresses; but somehow my hands can't fold
up gowns and collars, like your deft little fingers. Please will
you help me to pack? That's a real, tangible piece of kindness, and
not sentimental consolation for sentimental distresses, which are,
perhaps, imaginary after all."

In general, it is the people that are left behind stationary, who
give way to low spirits at any parting; the travellers, however
bitterly they may feel the separation, find something in the change
of scene to soften regret in the very first hour of separation. But
as Molly walked home with her father from seeing Mrs. Gibson and
Cynthia off to London by the "Umpire" coach, she almost danced along
the street.

"Now, papa!" said she, "I'm going to have you all to myself for a
whole week. You must be very obedient."

"Don't be tyrannical, then. You're walking me out of breath, and
we're cutting Mrs. Goodenough, in our hurry."

So they crossed over the street to speak to Mrs. Goodenough.

"We've just been seeing my wife and her daughter off to London. Mrs.
Gibson has gone up for a week!"

"Deary, deary, to London, and only for a week! Why, I can remember
its being a three days' journey! It'll be very lonesome for you, Miss
Molly, without your young companion!"

"Yes!" said Molly, suddenly feeling as if she ought to have taken
this view of the case. "I shall miss Cynthia very much."

"And you, Mr. Gibson; why, it'll be like being a widower over again!
You must come and drink tea with me some evening. We must try and
cheer you up a bit amongst us. Shall it be Tuesday?"

In spite of the sharp pinch which Molly gave to his arm, Mr. Gibson
accepted the invitation, much to the gratification of the old lady.

"Papa, how could you go and waste one of our evenings! We have but
six in all, and now but five; and I had so reckoned on our doing all
sorts of things together."

"What sort of things?"

"Oh, I don't know: everything that is unrefined and ungenteel," added
she, slily looking up into her father's face.

His eyes twinkled, but the rest of his face was perfectly grave. "I'm
not going to be corrupted. With toil and labour I've reached a very
fair height of refinement. I won't be pulled down again."

"Yes, you will, papa. We'll have bread-and-cheese for lunch this
very day. And you shall wear your slippers in the drawing-room every
evening you'll stay quietly at home; and oh, papa, don't you think I
could ride Nora Creina? I've been looking out the old grey skirt, and
I think I could make myself tidy."

"Where is the side-saddle to come from?"

"To be sure, the old one won't fit that great Irish mare. But I'm not
particular, papa. I think I could manage somehow."

"Thank you. But I'm not quite going to return into barbarism. It may
be a depraved taste, but I should like to see my daughter properly
mounted."

"Think of riding together down the lanes--why, the dog-roses must be
all out in flower, and the honeysuckles, and the hay--how I should
like to see Merriman's farm again! Papa, do let me have one ride with
you! Please do. I'm sure we can manage it somehow."

And "somehow" it was managed. "Somehow" all Molly's wishes came to
pass; there was only one little drawback to this week of holiday and
happy intercourse with her father. Everybody would ask them out to
tea. They were quite like bride and bridegroom; for the fact was,
that the late dinners which Mrs. Gibson had introduced into her own
house, were a great inconvenience in the calculations of the small
tea-drinkings at Hollingford. How ask people to tea at six, who dined
at that hour? How, when they refused cake and sandwiches at half-past
eight, how induce other people who were really hungry to commit a
vulgarity before those calm and scornful eyes? So there had been a
great lull of invitations for the Gibsons to Hollingford tea-parties.
Mrs. Gibson, whose object was to squeeze herself into "county
society," had taken this being left out of the smaller festivities
with great equanimity; but Molly missed the kind homeliness of the
parties to which she had gone from time to time as long as she could
remember; and though, as each three-cornered note was brought in,
she grumbled a little over the loss of another charming evening
with her father, she really was glad to go again in the old way
among old friends. Miss Browning and Miss Phoebe were especially
compassionate towards her in her loneliness. If they had had their
will she would have dined there every day; and she had to call upon
them very frequently in order to prevent their being hurt at her
declining the dinners. Mrs. Gibson wrote twice during her week's
absence to her husband. That piece of news was quite satisfactory
to the Miss Brownings, who had of late held themselves a great deal
aloof from a house where they chose to suppose that their presence
was not wanted. In their winter evenings they had often talked over
Mr. Gibson's household, and having little besides conjecture to go
upon, they found the subject interminable, as they could vary the
possibilities every day. One of their wonders was how Mr. and Mrs.
Gibson really got on together; another was whether Mrs. Gibson was
extravagant or not. Now two letters during the week of her absence
showed what was in those days considered a very proper amount of
conjugal affection. Yet not too much--at elevenpence-halfpenny
postage. A third letter would have been extravagant. Sister looked to
sister with an approving nod as Molly named the second letter, which
arrived in Hollingford the very day before Mrs. Gibson was to return.
They had settled between themselves that two letters would show the
right amount of good feeling and proper understanding in the Gibson
family: more would have been extravagant; only one would have been
a mere matter of duty. There had been rather a question between
Miss Browning and Miss Phoebe as to which person the second letter
(supposing it came) was to be addressed to. It would be very conjugal
to write twice to Mr. Gibson; and yet it would be very pretty if
Molly came in for her share.

"You've had another letter, you say, my dear?" asked Miss Browning.
"I daresay Mrs. Gibson has written to you this time?"

"It is a large sheet, and Cynthia has written on one half to me, and
all the rest is to papa."

"A very nice arrangement, I'm sure. And what does Cynthia say? Is she
enjoying herself?"

"Oh, yes, I think so. They've had a dinner-party; and one night,
when mamma was at Lady Cumnor's, Cynthia went to the play with her
cousins."

"Upon my word! and all in one week? I do call that dissipation. Why,
Thursday would be taken up with the journey, and Friday with resting,
and Sunday is Sunday all the world over; and they must have written
on Tuesday. Well! I hope Cynthia won't find Hollingford dull, that's
all, when she comes back."

"I don't think it's likely," said Miss Phoebe, with a little simper
and a knowing look, which sate oddly on her kindly innocent face.
"You see a great deal of Mr. Preston, don't you, Molly?"

"Mr. Preston!" said Molly, flushing up with surprise. "No! not much.
He's been at Ashcombe all winter, you know! He has but just come back
to settle here. What should make you think so?"

"Oh! a little bird told us," said Miss Browning. Molly knew that
little bird from her childhood, and had always hated it, and longed
to wring its neck. Why could not people speak out and say that they
did not mean to give up the name of their informant? But it was a
very favourite form of fiction with the Miss Brownings, and to Miss
Phoebe it was the very acme of wit.

"The little bird was flying about one day in Heath Lane, and it saw
Mr. Preston and a young lady--we won't say who--walking together in
a very friendly manner, that is to say, he was on horseback; but the
path is raised above the road, just where there is the little wooden
bridge over the brook--"

"Perhaps Molly is in the secret, and we ought not to ask her about
it," said Miss Phoebe, seeing Molly's extreme discomfiture and
annoyance.

"It can be no great secret," said Miss Browning, dropping the
little-bird formula, and assuming an air of dignified reproval at
Miss Phoebe's interruption, "for Miss Hornblower says Mr. Preston
owns to being engaged--"

"At any rate it isn't to Cynthia, that I know positively," said Molly
with some vehemence. "And pray put a stop to any such reports; you
don't know what mischief they may do. I do so hate that kind of
chatter!" It was not very respectful of Molly to speak in this way
to be sure, but she thought only of Roger; and the distress any such
reports might cause, should he ever hear of them (in the centre of
Africa!) made her colour up scarlet with vexation.

"Heighty-teighty! Miss Molly! don't you remember that I am old enough
to be your mother, and that it is not pretty behaviour to speak so to
us--to me! 'Chatter' to be sure. Really, Molly--"

"I beg your pardon," said Molly, only half-penitent.

"I daresay you did not mean to speak so to sister," said Miss
Phoebe, trying to make peace.

Molly did not answer all at once. She wanted to explain how much
mischief might be done by such reports.

"But don't you see," she went on, still flushed by vexation, "how
bad it is to talk of such things in such a way? Supposing one of
them cared for some one else, and that might happen, you know; Mr.
Preston, for instance, may be engaged to some one else?"

"Molly! I pity the woman! Indeed I do. I have a very poor opinion of
Mr. Preston," said Miss Browning, in a warning tone of voice; for a
new idea had come into her head.

"Well, but the woman, or young lady, would not like to hear such
reports about Mr. Preston."

"Perhaps not. But for all that, take my word for it, he's a great
flirt, and young ladies had better not have much to do with him."

"I daresay it was all accident their meeting in Heath Lane," said
Miss Phoebe.

"I know nothing about it," said Molly, "and I daresay I have been
impertinent, only please don't talk about it any more. I have my
reasons for asking you." She got up, for by the striking of the
church clock she had just found out that it was later than she had
thought, and she knew that her father would be at home by this time.
She bent down and kissed Miss Browning's grave and passive face.

"How you are growing, Molly!" said Miss Phoebe, anxious to cover
over her sister's displeasure. "'As tall and as straight as a
poplar-tree!' as the old song says."

"Grow in grace, Molly, as well as in good looks!" said Miss Browning,
watching her out of the room. As soon as she was fairly gone, Miss
Browning got up and shut the door quite securely, and then sitting
down near her sister, she said, in a low voice, "Phoebe, it was
Molly herself that was with Mr. Preston in Heath Lane that day when
Mrs. Goodenough saw them together!"

"Gracious goodness me!" exclaimed Miss Phoebe, receiving it at once
as gospel. "How do you know?"

"By putting two and two together. Didn't you notice how red Molly
went, and then pale, and how she said she knew for a fact that Mr.
Preston and Cynthia Kirkpatrick were not engaged?"

"Perhaps not engaged; but Mrs. Goodenough saw them loitering
together, all by their own two selves--"

"Mrs. Goodenough only crossed Heath Lane at the Shire Oak, as she was
riding in her phaeton," said Miss Browning sententiously. "We all
know what a coward she is in a carriage, so that most likely she had
only half her wits about her, and her eyes are none of the best when
she is standing steady on the ground. Molly and Cynthia have got
their new plaid shawls just alike, and they trim their bonnets alike,
and Molly is grown as tall as Cynthia since Christmas. I was always
afraid she'd be short and stumpy, but she's now as tall and slender
as anyone need be. I'll answer for it, Mrs. Goodenough saw Molly, and
took her for Cynthia."

When Miss Browning "answered for it" Miss Phoebe gave up doubting.
She sate some time in silence revolving her thoughts. Then she said:

"It wouldn't be such a very bad match after all, sister." She spoke
very meekly, awaiting her sister's sanction to her opinion.

"Phoebe, it would be a bad match for Mary Pearson's daughter. If
I had known what I know now we'd never have had him to tea last
September."

"Why, what do you know?" asked Miss Phoebe.

"Miss Hornblower told me many things; some that I don't think
you ought to hear, Phoebe. He was engaged to a very pretty Miss
Gregson, at Henwick, where he comes from; and her father made
inquiries, and heard so much that was bad about him that he made his
daughter break off the match, and she's dead since!"

"How shocking!" said Miss Phoebe, duly impressed.

"Besides, he plays at billiards, and he bets at races, and some
people do say he keeps race-horses."

"But isn't it strange that the earl keeps him on as his agent?"

"No! perhaps not. He's very clever about land, and very sharp in all
law affairs; and my lord isn't bound to take notice--if indeed he
knows--of the manner in which Mr. Preston talks when he has taken too
much wine."

"Taken too much wine! Oh, sister, is he a drunkard? and we have had
him to tea!"

"I didn't say he was a drunkard, Phoebe," said Miss Browning,
pettishly. "A man may take too much wine occasionally, without being
a drunkard. Don't let me hear you using such coarse words, Phoebe!"

Miss Phoebe was silent for a time after this rebuke.

Presently she said, "I do hope it wasn't Molly Gibson."

"You may hope as much as you like, but I'm pretty sure it was.
However, we'd better say nothing about it to Mrs. Goodenough; she has
got Cynthia into her head, and there let her rest. Time enough to set
reports afloat about Molly when we know there's some truth in them.
Mr. Preston might do for Cynthia, who's been brought up in France,
though she has such pretty manners; but it may have made her not
particular. He must not, and he shall not, have Molly, if I go into
church and forbid the banns myself; but I'm afraid--I'm afraid
there's something between her and him. We must keep on the look-out,
Phoebe. I'll be her guardian angel, in spite of herself."




CHAPTER XLI.

GATHERING CLOUDS.


[Illustration (untitled)]

Mrs. Gibson came back full of rose-coloured accounts of London. Lady
Cumnor had been gracious and affectionate, "so touched by my going
up to see her so soon after her return to England," Lady Harriet
charming and devoted to her old governess, Lord Cumnor "just like
his dear usual hearty self;" and as for the Kirkpatricks, no Lord
Chancellor's house was ever grander than theirs, and the silk gown of
the Q.C. had floated over housemaids and footmen. Cynthia, too, was
so much admired; and as for her dress, Mrs. Kirkpatrick had showered
down ball-dresses and wreaths, and pretty bonnets and mantles, like a
fairy godmother. Mr. Gibson's poor present of ten pounds shrank into
very small dimensions compared with all this munificence.

"And they're so fond of her, I don't know when we shall have her
back," was Mrs. Gibson's winding-up sentence. "And now, Molly, what
have you and papa been doing? Very gay, you sounded in your letter.
I had not time to read it in London; so I put it in my pocket, and
read it in the coach coming home. But, my dear child, you do look
so old-fashioned with your gown made all tight, and your hair all
tumbling about in curls. Curls are quite gone out. We must do your
hair differently," she continued, trying to smooth Molly's black
waves into straightness.

"I sent Cynthia an African letter," said Molly, timidly. "Did you
hear anything of what was in it?"

"Oh, yes, poor child! It made her very uneasy, I think; she said she
did not feel inclined to go to Mr. Rawson's ball, which was on that
night, and for which Mrs. Kirkpatrick had given her the ball-dress.
But there was really nothing for her to fidget herself about. Roger
only said he had had another touch of fever, but was better when he
wrote. He says every European has to be acclimatized by fever in that
part of Abyssinia where he is."

"And did she go?" asked Molly.

"Yes, to be sure. It is not an engagement; and if it were, it is not
acknowledged. Fancy her going and saying, 'A young man that I know
has been ill for a few days in Africa, two months ago, therefore I
don't want to go to the ball to-night.' It would have seemed like
affectation of sentiment; and if there's one thing I hate it is
that."

"She would hardly enjoy herself," said Molly.

"Oh, yes, but she did. Her dress was white gauze, trimmed with
lilacs, and she really did look--a mother may be allowed a little
natural partiality--most lovely. And she danced every dance, although
she was quite a stranger. I am sure she enjoyed herself, from her
manner of talking about it next morning."

"I wonder if the Squire knows."

"Knows what? Oh, yes, to be sure--you mean about Roger. I daresay he
doesn't, and there's no need to tell him, for I've no doubt it is all
right now." And she went out of the room to finish her unpacking.

Molly let her work fall, and sighed. "It will be a year the day after
to-morrow since he came here to propose our going to Hurst Wood, and
mamma was so vexed at his calling before lunch. I wonder if Cynthia
remembers it as well as I do. And now, perhaps-- Oh! Roger, Roger! I
wish--I pray that you were safe home again! How could we all bear it,
if--"

She covered her face with her hands, and tried to stop thinking.
Suddenly she got up, as if stung by a venomous fancy.

"I don't believe she loves him as she ought, or she could not--could
not have gone and danced. What shall I do if she does not? What shall
I do? I can bear anything but that."

But she found the long suspense as to his health hard enough to
endure. They were not likely to hear from him for a month at least,
and before that time had elapsed Cynthia would be at home again.
Molly learnt to long for her return before a fortnight of her absence
was over. She had had no idea that perpetual tÉte-ł-tÉtes with Mrs.
Gibson could, by any possibility, be so tiresome as she found them.
Perhaps Molly's state of delicate health, consequent upon her rapid
growth during the last few months, made her irritable; but really
often she had to get up and leave the room to calm herself down after
listening to a long series of words, more frequently plaintive or
discontented in tone than cheerful, and which at the end conveyed
no distinct impression of either the speaker's thought or feeling.
Whenever anything had gone wrong, whenever Mr. Gibson had coolly
persevered in anything to which she had objected; whenever the cook
had made a mistake about the dinner, or the housemaid broken any
little frangible article; whenever Molly's hair was not done to her
liking, or her dress did not become her, or the smell of dinner
pervaded the house, or the wrong callers came, or the right callers
did not come--in fact, whenever anything went wrong, poor Mr.
Kirkpatrick was regretted and mourned over, nay, almost blamed, as
if, had he only given himself the trouble of living, he could have
helped it.

"When I look back to those happy days, it seems to me as if I had
never valued them as I ought. To be sure--youth, love,--what did we
care for poverty! I remember dear Mr. Kirkpatrick walking five miles
into Stratford to buy me a muffin because I had such a fancy for one
after Cynthia was born. I don't mean to complain of dear papa--but
I don't think--but, perhaps I ought not to say it to you. If Mr.
Kirkpatrick had but taken care of that cough of his; but he was so
obstinate! Men always are, I think. And it really was selfish of
him. Only I daresay he did not consider the forlorn state in which I
should be left. It came harder upon me than upon most people, because
I always was of such an affectionate sensitive nature. I remember a
little poem of Mr. Kirkpatrick's, in which he compared my heart to a
harpstring, vibrating to the slightest breeze."

"I thought harpstrings required a pretty strong finger to make them
sound," said Molly.

"My dear child, you've no more poetry in you than your father. And as
for your hair! it's worse than ever. Can't you drench it in water to
take those untidy twists and twirls out of it?"

"It only makes it curl more and more when it gets dry," said Molly,
sudden tears coming into her eyes as a recollection came before her
like a picture seen long ago and forgotten for years--a young mother
washing and dressing her little girl; placing the half-naked darling
on her knee, and twining the wet rings of dark hair fondly round her
fingers, and then, in an ecstasy of fondness, kissing the little
curly head.

The receipt of Cynthia's letters made very agreeable events. She
did not write often, but her letters were tolerably long when they
did come, and very sprightly in tone. There was constant mention
made of many new names, which conveyed no idea to Molly, though Mrs.
Gibson would try and enlighten her by running commentaries like the
following:--

"Mrs. Green! ah, that's Mr. Jones's pretty cousin, who lives in
Russell Square with the fat husband. They keep their carriage; but
I'm not sure if it is not Mr. Green who is Mrs. Jones's cousin. We
can ask Cynthia when she comes home. Mr. Henderson! to be sure--a
young man with black whiskers, a pupil of Mr. Kirkpatrick's
formerly,--or was he a pupil of Mr. Murray's? I know they said he had
read law with somebody. Ah, yes! they are the people who called the
day after Mr. Rawson's ball, and who admired Cynthia so much, without
knowing I was her mother. She was very handsomely dressed indeed, in
black satin; and the son had a glass eye, but he was a young man of
good property. Coleman! yes, that was the name."

No more news of Roger until some time after Cynthia had returned from
her London visit. She came back looking fresher and prettier than
ever, beautifully dressed, thanks to her own good taste, and her
cousin's generosity, full of amusing details of the gay life she had
been enjoying, yet not at all out of spirits at having left it behind
her. She brought home all sorts of pretty and dainty devices for
Molly; a neck-ribbon made up in the newest fashion, a pattern for a
tippet, a delicate pair of light gloves, embroidered as Molly had
never seen gloves embroidered before, and many another little sign of
remembrance during her absence. Yet somehow or other, Molly felt that
Cynthia was changed in her relation to her. Molly was aware that she
had never had Cynthia's full confidence, for with all her apparent
frankness and _naĽvetÄ_ of manner, Cynthia was extremely reserved and
reticent. She knew this much of herself, and had often laughed about
it to Molly, and the latter had by this time found out the truth of
her friend's assertion. But Molly did not trouble herself much about
it. She too knew that there were many thoughts and feelings that
flitted through her mind which she should never think of telling
to any one, except perhaps--if they were ever very much thrown
together--to her father. She knew that Cynthia withheld from her more
than thoughts and feelings--that she withheld facts. But then, as
Molly reflected, these facts might involve details of struggle and
suffering--might relate to her mother's neglect--and altogether be of
so painful a character, that it would be well if Cynthia could forget
her childhood altogether, instead of fixing it in her mind by the
relation of her grievances and troubles. So it was not now by any
want of confidence that Molly felt distanced as it were. It was
because Cynthia rather avoided than sought her companionship; because
her eyes shunned the straight, serious, loving look of Molly's;
because there were certain subjects on which she evidently disliked
speaking, not particularly interesting things as far as Molly could
perceive, but it almost seemed as if they lay on the road to points
to be avoided. Molly felt a sort of sighing pleasure in noticing
Cynthia's changed manner of talking about Roger. She spoke of him
tenderly now; "poor Roger," as she called him; and Molly thought
that she must be referring to the illness which he had mentioned
in his last letter. One morning in the first week after Cynthia's
return home, just as he was going out, Mr. Gibson ran up into the
drawing-room, hat on, booted and spurred, and hastily laid an open
pamphlet down before her; pointing out a particular passage with
his finger, but not speaking a word before he rapidly quitted the
room. His eyes were sparkling, and had an amused as well as pleased
expression. All this Molly noticed, as well as Cynthia's flush of
colour as she read what was thus pointed out to her. Then she pushed
it a little on one side, not closing the book, however, and went on
with her work.

"What is it? may I see it?" asked Molly, stretching out her hand for
the pamphlet, which lay within her reach. But she did not take it
until Cynthia had said--

"Certainly; I don't suppose there are any great secrets in a
scientific journal, full of reports of meetings." And she gave the
book a little push towards Molly.

"Oh, Cynthia!" said Molly, catching her breath as she read, "are
you not proud?" For it was an account of an annual gathering of the
Geographical Society, and Lord Hollingford had read a letter he had
received from Roger Hamley, dated from Arracuoba, a district in
Africa, hitherto unvisited by any intelligent European traveller; and
about which Mr. Hamley sent many curious particulars. The reading of
this letter had been received with the greatest interest, and several
subsequent speakers had paid the writer very high compliments.

But Molly might have known Cynthia better than to expect an answer
responsive to the feelings that prompted her question. Let Cynthia
be ever so proud, ever so glad, or so grateful, or even indignant,
remorseful, grieved or sorry, the very fact that she was expected by
another to entertain any of these emotions, would have been enough to
prevent her expressing them.

"I'm afraid I'm not as much struck by the wonder of the thing as you
are, Molly. Besides, it is not news to me; at least, not entirely.
I heard about the meeting before I left London; it was a good deal
talked about in my uncle's set; to be sure, I didn't hear all the
fine things they say of him there--but then, you know, that's a mere
fashion of speaking, which means nothing; somebody is bound to pay
compliments when a lord takes the trouble to read one of his letters
aloud."

"Nonsense," said Molly. "You know you don't believe what you are
saying, Cynthia."

Cynthia gave that pretty little jerk of her shoulders, which was her
equivalent for a French shrug, but did not lift up her head from her
sewing. Molly began to read the report over again.

"Why, Cynthia!" she said, "you might have been there; ladies were
there. It says 'many ladies were present.' Oh, couldn't you have
managed to go? If your uncle's set cared about these things, wouldn't
some of them have taken you?"

"Perhaps, if I had asked them. But I think they would have been
rather astonished at my sudden turn for science."

"You might have told your uncle how matters really stood, he wouldn't
have talked about it if you had wished him not, I am sure, and he
could have helped you."

"Once for all, Molly," said Cynthia, now laying down her work, and
speaking with quick authority, "do learn to understand that it is,
and always has been my wish, not to have the relation which Roger and
I bear to each other, mentioned or talked about. When the right time
comes, I will make it known to my uncle, and to everybody whom it may
concern; but I am not going to make mischief, and get myself into
trouble--even for the sake of hearing compliments paid to him--by
letting it out before the time. If I'm pushed to it, I'd sooner
break it off altogether at once, and have done with it. I can't be
worse off than I am now." Her angry tone had changed into a kind of
desponding complaint before she had ended her sentence. Molly looked
at her with dismay.

"I can't understand you, Cynthia," she said at length.

"No; I daresay you can't," said Cynthia, looking at her with tears
in her eyes, and very tenderly, as if in atonement for her late
vehemence. "I am afraid--I hope you never will."

In a moment, Molly's arms were round her. "Oh, Cynthia," she
murmured, "have I been plaguing you? Have I vexed you? Don't say
you're afraid of my knowing you. Of course you've your faults,
everybody has, but I think I love you the better for them."

"I don't know that I am so very bad," said Cynthia, smiling a little
through the tears that Molly's words and caresses had forced to
overflow from her eyes. "But I have got into scrapes. I'm in a scrape
now. I do sometimes believe I shall always be in scrapes, and if they
ever come to light, I shall seem to be worse than I really am; and I
know your father will throw me off, and I--no, I won't be afraid that
you will, Molly."

"I'm sure I won't. Are they--do you think--how would Roger take it?"
asked Molly, very timidly.

"I don't know. I hope he will never hear of it. I don't see why he
should, for in a little while I shall be quite clear again. It all
came about without my ever thinking I was doing wrong. I've a great
mind to tell you all about it, Molly."

Molly did not like to urge it, though she longed to know, and to see
if she could not offer help; but while Cynthia was hesitating, and
perhaps, to say the truth, rather regretting that she had even made
this slight advance towards bestowing her confidence, Mrs. Gibson
came in, full of some manner of altering a gown of hers, so as to
make it into the fashion of the day, as she had seen it during her
visit to London. Cynthia seemed to forget her tears and her troubles,
and to throw her whole soul into millinery.

Cynthia's correspondence went on pretty briskly with her London
cousins, according to the usual rate of correspondence in those
days. Indeed, Mrs. Gibson was occasionally inclined to complain of
the frequency of Helen Kirkpatrick's letters; for before the penny
post came in, the recipient had to pay the postage of letters; and
eleven-pence-halfpenny three times a week came, according to Mrs.
Gibson's mode of reckoning when annoyed, to a sum "between three
and four shillings." But these complaints were only for the family;
they saw the wrong side of the tapestry. Hollingford in general,
Miss Brownings in particular, heard of "dear Helen's enthusiastic
friendship for Cynthia," and of "the real pleasure it was to receive
such constant news--relays of news indeed--from London. It was almost
as good as living there!"

"A great deal better I should think," said Miss Browning with some
severity. For she had got many of her notions of the metropolis
from the British Essayists, where town is so often represented as
the centre of dissipation, corrupting country wives and squires'
daughters, and unfitting them for all their duties by the constant
whirl of its not always innocent pleasures. London was a sort of
moral pitch, which few could touch and not be defiled. Miss Browning
had been on the watch for the signs of deterioration in Cynthia's
character ever since her return home. But, except in a greater number
of pretty and becoming articles of dress, there was no great change
for the worse to be perceived. Cynthia had been "in the world," had
"beheld the glare and glitter and dazzling display of London," yet
had come back to Hollingford as ready as ever to place a chair for
Miss Browning, or to gather flowers for a nosegay for Miss Phoebe,
or to mend her own clothes. But all this was set down to the merits
of Cynthia, not to the credit of London-town.

"As far as I can judge of London," said Miss Browning, sententiously
continuing her tirade against the place, "it's no better than a
pickpocket and a robber dressed up in the spoils of honest folk. I
should like to know where my Lord Hollingford was bred, and Mr. Roger
Hamley. Your good husband lent me that report of the meeting, Mrs.
Gibson, where so much was said about them both, and he was as proud
of their praises as if he had been akin to them, and Phoebe read
it aloud to me, for the print was too small for my eyes; she was a
good deal perplexed with all the new names of places, but I said
she had better skip them all, for we had never heard of them before
and probably should never hear of them again, but she read out the
fine things they said of my lord, and Mr. Roger, and I put it to
you, where were they born and bred? Why, within eight miles of
Hollingford; it might have been Molly there or me; it's all a chance;
and then they go and talk about the pleasures of intellectual society
in London, and the distinguished people up there that it is such an
advantage to know, and all the time I know it's only shops and the
play that's the real attraction. But that's neither here nor there.
We all put our best foot foremost, and if we have a reason to give
that looks sensible we speak it out like men, and never say anything
about the silliness we are hugging to our hearts. But I ask you
again, where does this fine society come from, and these wise men,
and these distinguished travellers? Why, out of country parishes like
this! London picks 'em all up, and decks herself with them, and then
calls out loud to the folks she's robbed, and says, 'Come and see
how fine I am.' Fine, indeed! I've no patience with London: Cynthia
is much better out of it; and I'm not sure, if I were you, Mrs.
Gibson, if I wouldn't stop up those London letters: they'll only be
unsettling her."

"But perhaps she may live in London some of these days, Miss
Browning," simpered Mrs. Gibson.

"Time enough then to be thinking of London. I wish her an honest
country husband with enough to live upon, and a little to lay by,
and a good character to boot. Mind that, Molly," said she, firing
round upon the startled Molly; "I wish Cynthia a husband with a good
character; but she's got a mother to look after her; you've none, and
when your mother was alive she was a dear friend of mine: so I'm not
going to let you throw yourself away upon any one whose life isn't
clear and above-board, you may depend upon it!"

This last speech fell like a bomb into the quiet little drawing-room,
it was delivered with such vehemence. Miss Browning, in her secret
heart, meant it as a warning against the intimacy she believed that
Molly had formed with Mr. Preston; but as it happened that Molly had
never dreamed of any such intimacy, the girl could not imagine why
such severity of speech should be addressed to her. Mrs. Gibson, who
always took up the points of every word or action where they touched
her own self (and called it sensitiveness), broke the silence that
followed Miss Browning's speech by saying, plaintively,--

"I'm sure, Miss Browning, you are very much mistaken if you think
that any mother could take more care of Molly than I do. I don't--I
can't think there is any need for any one to interfere to protect
her, and I have not an idea why you have been talking in this way,
just as if we were all wrong, and you were all right. It hurts my
feelings, indeed it does; for Molly can tell you there is not a thing
or a favour that Cynthia has, that she has not. And as for not taking
care of her, why, if she were to go up to London to-morrow, I should
make a point of going with her to see after her; and I never did
it for Cynthia when she was at school in France; and her bedroom
is furnished just like Cynthia's, and I let her wear my red shawl
whenever she likes--she might have it oftener if she would. I can't
think what you mean, Miss Browning."

"I did not mean to offend you, but I meant just to give Molly a hint.
She understands what I mean."

"I'm sure I don't," said Molly, boldly. "I haven't a notion what you
meant, if you were alluding to anything more than you said straight
out,--that you do not wish me to marry any one who hasn't a good
character, and that, as you were a friend of mamma's, you would
prevent my marrying a man with a bad character, by every means in
your power. I'm not thinking of marrying; I don't want to marry
anybody at all; but if I did, and he were not a good man, I should
thank you for coming and warning me of it."

"I shall not stand on warning you, Molly. I shall forbid the banns in
church, if need be," said Miss Browning, half convinced of the clear
transparent truth of what Molly had said--blushing all over, it is
true, but with her steady eyes fixed on Miss Browning's face while
she spoke.

"Do!" said Molly.

"Well, well, I won't say any more. Perhaps I was mistaken. We won't
say any more about it. But remember what I have said, Molly; there's
no harm in that, at any rate. I'm sorry I hurt your feelings, Mrs.
Gibson. As stepmothers go, I think you try and do your duty. Good
morning. Good-by to you both, and God bless you."

If Miss Browning thought that her final blessing would secure peace
in the room she was leaving, she was very much mistaken; Mrs. Gibson
burst out with,--

"Try and do my duty, indeed! I should be much obliged to you, Molly,
if you would take care not to behave in such a manner as to bring
down upon me such impertinence as I have just been receiving from
Miss Browning."

"But I don't know what made her talk as she did, mamma," said Molly.

"I'm sure I don't know, and I don't care either. But I know
that I never was spoken to as if I was trying to do my duty
before,--'trying' indeed! everybody always knew that I did it,
without talking about it before my face in that rude manner. I've
that deep feeling about duty that I think it ought only to be talked
about in church, and in such sacred places as that; not to have a
common caller startling one with it, even though she was an early
friend of your mother's. And as if I didn't look after you quite as
much as I look after Cynthia! Why, it was only yesterday I went up
into Cynthia's room and found her reading a letter that she put away
in a hurry as soon as I came in, and I didn't even ask her who it was
from, and I'm sure I should have made you tell me."

Very likely. Mrs. Gibson shrank from any conflicts with Cynthia,
pretty sure that she would be worsted in the end; while Molly
generally submitted sooner than have any struggle for her own will.

Just then Cynthia came in.

"What's the matter?" said she quickly, seeing that something was
wrong.

"Why, Molly has been doing something which has set that impertinent
Miss Browning off into lecturing me on trying to do my duty! If your
poor father had but lived, Cynthia, I should never have been spoken
to as I have been. 'A stepmother trying to do her duty,' indeed! That
was Miss Browning's expression."

Any allusion to her father took from Cynthia all desire of irony. She
came forward, and again asked Molly what was the matter.

Molly, herself ruffled, made answer,--

"Miss Browning seemed to think I was likely to marry some one whose
character was objectionable--"

"You, Molly?" said Cynthia.

"Yes--she once before spoke to me,--I suspect she has got some notion
about Mr. Preston in her head--"

Cynthia sate down quite suddenly. Molly went on: "And she spoke
as if mamma did not look enough after me,--I think she was rather
provoking--"

"Not rather, but very--very impertinent," said Mrs. Gibson, a little
soothed by Molly's recognition of her grievance.

"What could have put it into her head?" said Cynthia, very quietly,
taking up her sewing as she spoke.

"I don't know," said her mother, replying to the question after her
own fashion. "I'm sure I don't always approve of Mr. Preston; but
even if it was him she was thinking about, he's far more agreeable
than she is; and I had much rather have him coming to call than an
old maid like her any day."

"I don't know that it was Mr. Preston she was thinking about," said
Molly. "It was only a guess. When you were both in London she spoke
about him,--I thought she had heard something about you and him,
Cynthia." Unseen by her mother Cynthia looked up at Molly, her eyes
full of prohibition, her cheeks full of angry colour. Molly stopped
short suddenly. After that look she was surprised at the quietness
with which Cynthia said, almost immediately,--

"Well, after all, it is only your fancy that she was alluding to Mr.
Preston, so perhaps we had better not say any more about him; and as
for her advice to mamma to look after you better, Miss Molly, I'll
stand bail for your good behaviour; for both mamma and I know you're
the last person to do any foolish things in that way. And now don't
let us talk any more about it. I was coming to tell you that Hannah
Brand's little boy has been badly burnt, and his sister is downstairs
asking for old linen."

Mrs. Gibson was always kind to poor people, and she immediately got
up and went to her stores to search for the article wanted.

Cynthia turned quietly round to Molly.

"Molly, pray don't ever allude to anything between me and Mr.
Preston,--not to mamma, nor to any one. Never do! I've a reason for
it,--don't say anything more about it, ever."

Mrs. Gibson came back at this moment, and Molly had to stop short
again on the brink of Cynthia's confidence; uncertain indeed this
time, whether she would have been told anything more, and only sure
that she had annoyed Cynthia a good deal.

But the time was approaching when she would know all.




CHAPTER XLII.

THE STORM BURSTS.


The autumn drifted away through all its seasons. The golden
corn-harvest, the walks through the stubble-fields, and rambles into
hazel-copses in search of nuts; the stripping of the apple-orchards
of their ruddy fruit, amid the joyous cries and shouts of watching
children; and the gorgeous tulip-like colouring of the later time had
now come on with the shortening days. There was comparative silence
in the land, excepting for the distant shots, and the whirr of the
partridges as they rose up from the field.

Ever since Miss Browning's unlucky conversation, things had been
ajar in the Gibsons' house. Cynthia seemed to keep every one out at
(mental) arms'-length; and particularly avoided any private talks
with Molly. Mrs. Gibson, still cherishing a grudge against Miss
Browning for her implied accusation of not looking enough after
Molly, chose to exercise a most wearying supervision over the poor
girl. It was, "Where have you been, child?" "Who did you see?" "Who
was that letter from?" "Why were you so long out when you had only
to go to so-and-so?" just as if Molly had really been detected in
carrying on some underhand intercourse. She answered every question
asked of her with the simple truthfulness of perfect innocence;
but the inquiries (although she read their motive, and knew that
they arose from no especial suspicion of her conduct, but only that
Mrs. Gibson might be able to say that she looked well after her
stepdaughter) chafed her inexpressibly. Very often she did not go out
at all, sooner than have to give a plan of her intended proceedings,
when perhaps she had no plan at all,--only thought of wandering out
at her own sweet will, and of taking pleasure in the bright solemn
fading of the year. It was a very heavy time for Molly,--zest and
life had fled, and left so many of the old delights mere shells of
seeming. She thought it was that her youth had fled; at nineteen!
Cynthia was no longer the same, somehow: and perhaps Cynthia's change
would injure her in the distant Roger's opinion. Her stepmother
seemed almost kind in comparison with Cynthia's withdrawal of her
heart; Mrs. Gibson worried her, to be sure, with all these forms of
watching over her; but in all her other ways, she, at any rate, was
the same. Yet Cynthia herself seemed anxious and care-worn, though
she would not speak of her anxieties to Molly. And then the poor girl
in her goodness would blame herself for feeling Cynthia's change of
manner; for as Molly said to herself, "If it is hard work for me to
help always fretting after Roger, and wondering where he is, and how
he is, what must it be for her?"

One day Mr. Gibson came in, bright and swift.

"Molly," said he, "where's Cynthia?"

"Gone out to do some errands--"

"Well, it's a pity--but never mind. Put on your bonnet and cloak as
fast as you can. I've had to borrow old Simpson's dog-cart,--there
would have been room both for you and Cynthia; but as it is, you must
walk back alone. I'll drive you as far on the Barford Road as I can,
and then you must jump down. I can't take you on to Broadhurst's, I
may be kept there for hours."

Mrs. Gibson was out of the room; out of the house it might be, for
all Molly cared, now she had her father's leave and command. Her
bonnet and cloak were on in two minutes, and she was sitting by her
father's side, the back seat shut up, and the light weight going
swiftly and merrily bumping over the stone-paved lanes.

"Oh, this is charming!" said Molly, after a toss-up on her seat from
a tremendous bump.

"For youth, but not for crabbed age," said Mr. Gibson. "My bones are
getting rheumatic, and would rather go smoothly over macadamized
streets."

"That's treason to this lovely view and this fine pure air, papa.
Only I don't believe you."

"Thank you. As you are so complimentary, I think I shall put you down
at the foot of this hill; we've passed the second mile-stone from
Hollingford."

"Oh, let me just go up to the top! I know we can see the blue range
of the Malverns from it, and Dorrimer Hall among the woods; the horse
will want a minute's rest, and then I will get down without a word."

So she went up to the top of the hill; and there they sate still a
minute or two, enjoying the view, without much speaking. The woods
were golden; the old house of purple-red brick, with its twisted
chimneys, rose up from among them facing on to green lawns, and a
placid lake; beyond again were the Malvern Hills.

"Now jump down, lassie, and make the best of your way home before it
gets dark. You'll find the cut over Croston Heath shorter than the
road we've come by."

To get to Croston Heath, Molly had to go down a narrow lane
overshadowed by trees, with picturesque old cottages dotted here and
there on the steep sandy banks; and then there came a small wood,
and then there was a brook to be crossed on a plank-bridge, and up
the steeper fields on the opposite side were cut steps in the turfy
path; these ended, she was on Croston Heath, a wide-stretching
common skirted by labourers' dwellings, past which a near road to
Hollingford lay.

The loneliest part of the road was the first--the lane, the wood,
the little bridge, and the clambering through the upland fields. But
Molly cared little for loneliness. She went along the lane under the
over-arching elm-branches, from which, here and there, a yellow leaf
came floating down upon her very dress; past the last cottage where
a little child had tumbled down the sloping bank, and was publishing
the accident with frightened cries. Molly stooped to pick it up, and
taking it in her arms in a manner which caused intense surprise to
take the place of alarm in its little breast, she carried it up the
rough flag steps towards the cottage which she supposed to be its
home. The mother came running in from the garden behind the house,
still holding the late damsons she had been gathering in her apron;
but, on seeing her, the little creature held out its arms to go to
her, and she dropped her damsons all about as she took it, and began
to soothe it as it cried afresh, interspersing her lulling with
thanks to Molly. She called her by her name; and on Molly asking the
woman how she came to know it, she replied that before her marriage
she had been a servant of Mrs. Goodenough, and so was "bound to
know Dr. Gibson's daughter by sight." After the exchange of two or
three more words, Molly ran down into the lane, and pursued her way,
stopping here and there to gather a nosegay of such leaves as struck
her for their brilliant colouring. She entered the wood. As she
turned a corner in the lonely path, she heard a passionate voice of
distress; and in an instant she recognized Cynthia's tones. She stood
still and looked around. There were some thick holly-bushes shining
out dark green in the midst of the amber and scarlet foliage. If
any one was there, it must be behind these thick bushes. So Molly
left the path, and went straight, plunging through the brown tangled
growth of ferns and underwood, and turned the holly bushes. There
stood Mr. Preston and Cynthia; he holding her hands tight, each
looking as if just silenced in some vehement talk by the rustle of
Molly's footsteps.


[Illustration: THERE STOOD MR. PRESTON AND CYNTHIA.]


For an instant no one spoke. Then Cynthia said,--

"Oh, Molly, Molly, come and judge between us!"

Mr. Preston let go Cynthia's hands slowly, with a look that was more
of a sneer than a smile; and yet he, too, had been strongly agitated,
whatever was the subject in dispute. Molly came forward and took
Cynthia's arm, her eyes steadily fixed on Mr. Preston's face. It was
fine to see the fearlessness of her perfect innocence. He could not
bear her look, and said to Cynthia,--

"The subject of our conversation does not well admit of a third
person's presence. As Miss Gibson seems to wish for your company now,
I must beg you to fix some other time and place where we can finish
our discussion."

"I will go if Cynthia wishes me," said Molly.

"No, no; stay--I want you to stay--I want you to hear it all--I wish
I had told you sooner."

"You mean that you regret that she has not been made aware of our
engagement--that you promised long ago to be my wife. Pray remember
that it was you who made me promise secrecy, not I you!"

"I don't believe him, Cynthia. Don't, don't cry if you can help it;
I don't believe him."

"Cynthia," said he, suddenly changing his tone to fervid tenderness,
"pray, pray do not go on so; you can't think how it distresses me!"
He stepped forward to try and take her hand and soothe her; but she
shrank away from him, and sobbed the more irrepressibly. She felt
Molly's presence so much to be a protection that now she dared to
let herself go, and to weaken herself by giving way to her emotion.

"Go away!" said Molly. "Don't you see you make her worse?" But he
did not stir; he was looking at Cynthia so intently that he did not
seem even to hear her. "Go," said Molly, vehemently, "if it really
distresses you to see her cry. Don't you see, it's you who are the
cause of it?"

"I will go if Cynthia tells me," said he at length.

"Oh, Molly, I don't know what to do," said Cynthia, taking down her
hands from her tear-stained face, and appealing to Molly, and sobbing
worse than ever; in fact, she became hysterical, and though she tried
to speak coherently, no intelligible words would come.

"Run to that cottage in the trees, and fetch her a cup of water,"
said Molly. He hesitated a little.

"Why don't you go?" said Molly, impatiently.

"I have not done speaking to her; you will not leave before I come
back?"

"No. Don't you see she can't move in this state?"

He went quickly, if reluctantly.

Cynthia was some time before she could check her sobs enough to
speak. At length she said,--"Molly, I do hate him!"

"But what did he mean by saying you were engaged to him? Don't cry,
dear, but tell me; if I can help you I will, but I can't imagine what
it all really is."

"It's too long a story to tell now, and I'm not strong enough. Look!
he's coming back. As soon as I can, let us get home."

"With all my heart," said Molly.

He brought the water, and Cynthia drank, and was restored to
calmness.

"Now," said Molly, "we had better go home as fast as you can manage
it; it's getting dark quickly."

If she hoped to carry Cynthia off so easily she was mistaken. Mr.
Preston was resolute on this point. He said--

"I think since Miss Gibson has made herself acquainted with this
much, we had better let her know the whole truth--that you are
engaged to marry me as soon as you are twenty; otherwise your being
here with me, and by appointment too, may appear strange--even
equivocal to her."

"As I know that Cynthia is engaged to--another man, you can hardly
expect me to believe what you say, Mr. Preston."

"Oh, Molly," said Cynthia, trembling all over, but trying to be
calm, "I am not engaged--neither to the person you mean, nor to Mr.
Preston."

Mr. Preston forced a smile. "I think I have some letters that would
convince Miss Gibson of the truth of what I have said; and which will
convince Mr. Osborne Hamley, if necessary--I conclude it is to him
she is alluding."

"I am quite puzzled by you both," said Molly. "The only thing I
do know is, that we ought not to be standing here at this time of
evening, and that Cynthia and I shall go home directly. If you want
to talk to Miss Kirkpatrick, Mr. Preston, why don't you come to my
father's house, and ask to see her openly, and like a gentleman?"

"I am perfectly willing," said he; "I shall only be too glad to
explain to Mr. Gibson on what terms I stand in relation to her. If I
have not done it sooner, it is because I have yielded to her wishes."

"Pray, pray don't. Molly--you don't know all--you don't know anything
about it; you mean well and kindly, I know, but you are only making
mischief. I am quite well enough to walk, do let us go; I will tell
you all about it when we are at home." She took Molly's arm and tried
to hasten her away; but Mr. Preston followed, talking as he walked by
their side.

"I do not know what you will say at home; but can you deny that you
are my promised wife? Can you deny that it has only been at your
earnest request that I have kept the engagement secret so long?" He
was unwise--Cynthia stopped, and turned at bay.

"Since you will have it out,--since I must speak here, I own that
what you say is literally true; that when I was a neglected girl of
sixteen, you--whom I believed to be a friend, lent me money at my
need, and made me give you a promise of marriage."

"Made you!" said he, laying an emphasis on the first word.

Cynthia turned scarlet. "'Made' is not the right word, I confess.
I liked you then--you were almost my only friend--and, if it had
been a question of immediate marriage, I daresay I should never have
objected. But I know you better now; and you have persecuted me so of
late, that I tell you once for all (as I have told you before, till
I am sick of the very words), that nothing shall ever make me marry
you. Nothing! I see there's no chance of escaping exposure and, I
daresay, losing my character, and I know losing all the few friends
I have."

"Never me," said Molly, touched by the wailing tone of despair that
Cynthia was falling into.

"It is hard," said Mr. Preston. "You may believe all the bad things
you like about me, Cynthia, but I don't think you can doubt my real,
passionate, disinterested love for you."

"I do doubt it," said Cynthia, breaking out with fresh energy. "Ah!
when I think of the self-denying affection I have seen--I have
known--affection that thought of others before itself--"

Mr. Preston broke in at the pause she made. She was afraid of
revealing too much to him.

"You do not call it love which has been willing to wait for years--to
be silent while silence was desired--to suffer jealousy and to bear
neglect, relying on the solemn promise of a girl of sixteen--for
solemn say flimsy, when that girl grows older. Cynthia, I have loved
you, and I do love you, and I won't give you up. If you will but keep
your word, and marry me, I'll swear I'll make you love me in return."

"Oh, I wish--I wish I'd never borrowed that unlucky money, it was the
beginning of it all. Oh, Molly, I have saved and scrimped to repay
it, and he won't take it now; I thought if I could but repay it, it
would set me free."

"You seem to imply you sold yourself for twenty pounds," he said.
They were nearly on the common now, close to the protection of the
cottages, in very hearing of their inmates; if neither of the other
two thought of this, Molly did, and resolved in her mind to call in
at one of them, and ask for the labourer's protection home; at any
rate his presence must put a stop to this miserable altercation.

"I did not sell myself; I liked you then. But oh, how I do hate you
now!" cried Cynthia, unable to contain her words.

He bowed and turned back, vanishing rapidly down the field staircase.
At any rate that was a relief. Yet the two girls hastened on, as
if he was still pursuing them. Once, when Molly said something to
Cynthia, the latter replied--

"Molly, if you pity me--if you love me--don't say anything more just
now. We shall have to look as if nothing had happened when we get
home. Come to my room when we go upstairs to bed, and I'll tell you
all. I know you'll blame me terribly, but I will tell you all."

So Molly did not say another word till they reached home; and then,
comparatively at ease, inasmuch as no one perceived how late was
their return to the house, each of the girls went up into their
separate rooms, to rest and calm themselves before dressing for the
necessary family gathering at dinner. Molly felt as if she were so
miserably shaken that she could not have gone down at all, if her own
interests only had been at stake. She sate by her dressing-table,
holding her head in her hands, her candles unlighted, and the room in
soft darkness, trying to still her beating heart, and to recall all
she had heard, and what would be its bearing on the lives of those
whom she loved. Roger. Oh, Roger!--far away in mysterious darkness of
distance--loving as he did (ah, that was love! that was the love to
which Cynthia had referred, as worthy of the name!) and the object of
his love claimed by another--false to one she must be! How could it
be? What would he think and feel if ever he came to know it? It was
of no use trying to imagine his pain--that could do no good. What lay
before Molly was, to try and extricate Cynthia, if she could help her
by thought, or advice, or action; not to weaken herself by letting
her fancy run into pictures of possible, probable suffering.

When she went into the drawing-room before dinner, she found Cynthia
and her mother by themselves. There were candles in the room, but
they were not lighted, for the wood-fire blazed merrily if fitfully,
and they were awaiting Mr. Gibson's return, which might be expected
at any minute. Cynthia sate in the shade, so it was only by her
sensitive ear that Molly could judge of her state of composure. Mrs.
Gibson was telling some of her day's adventures--whom she had found
at home in the calls she had been making; who had been out; and
the small pieces of news she had heard. To Molly's quick sympathy
Cynthia's voice sounded languid and weary, but she made all the
proper replies, and expressed the proper interest at the right
places, and Molly came to the rescue, chiming in, with an effort,
it is true; but Mrs. Gibson was not one to notice slight shades
or differences in manner. When Mr. Gibson returned, the relative
positions of the parties were altered. It was Cynthia now who raised
herself into liveliness, partly from a consciousness that he would
have noticed any depression, and partly because Cynthia was one
of those natural coquettes, who, from their cradle to their grave,
instinctively bring out all their prettiest airs and graces in order
to stand well with any man, young or old, who may happen to be
present. She listened to his remarks and stories with all the sweet
intentness of happier days, till Molly, silent and wondering, could
hardly believe that the Cynthia before her was the same girl as she
who was sobbing and crying as if her heart would break, but two hours
before. It is true she looked pale and heavy-eyed, but that was the
only sign she gave of her past trouble, which yet must be a present
care, thought Molly. After dinner, Mr. Gibson went out to his town
patients; Mrs. Gibson subsided into her arm-chair, holding a sheet of
_The Times_ before her, behind which she took a quiet and lady-like
doze. Cynthia had a book in one hand, with the other she shaded her
eyes from the light. Molly alone could neither read, nor sleep, nor
work. She sate in the seat in the bow-window; the blind was not drawn
down, for there was no danger of their being overlooked. She gazed
into the soft outer darkness, and found herself striving to discern
the outlines of objects--the cottage at the end of the garden--the
great beech-tree with the seat round it--the wire arches, up which
the summer roses had clambered; each came out faint and dim against
the dusky velvet of the atmosphere. Presently tea came, and there was
the usual nightly bustle. The table was cleared, Mrs. Gibson roused
herself, and made the same remark about dear papa that she had done
at the same hour for weeks past. Cynthia too did not look different
from usual. And yet what a hidden mystery did her calmness hide!
thought Molly. At length came bed-time, and the customary little
speeches. Both Molly and Cynthia went to their own rooms without
exchanging a word. When Molly was in hers she had forgotten whether
she was to go to Cynthia, or Cynthia to come to her. She took off her
gown and put on her dressing-gown, and stood and waited, and even sat
down for a minute or two: but Cynthia did not come, so Molly went and
knocked at the opposite door, which, to her surprise, she found shut.
When she entered the room Cynthia sate by her dressing-table, just as
she had come up from the drawing-room. She had been leaning her head
on her arms, and seemed almost to have forgotten the tryst she had
made with Molly, for she looked up as if startled, and her face did
seem full of worry and distress; in her solitude she made no more
exertion, but gave way to thoughts of care.




CHAPTER XLIII.

CYNTHIA'S CONFESSION.


"You said I might come," said Molly, "and that you would tell me
all."

"You know all, I think," said Cynthia, heavily. "Perhaps you don't
know what excuses I have, but at any rate you know what a scrape I am
in."

"I've been thinking a great deal," said Molly, timidly and
doubtfully. "And I can't help fancying if you told papa--"

Before she could go on, Cynthia had stood up.

"No!" said she. "That I won't. Unless I'm to leave here at once. And
you know I have not another place to go to--without warning, I mean.
I daresay my uncle would take me in; he's a relation, and would be
bound to stand by me in whatever disgrace I might be; or perhaps I
might get a governess's situation--a pretty governess I should be!"

"Pray, please, Cynthia, don't go off into such wild talking. I don't
believe you've done so very wrong. You say you have not, and I
believe you. That horrid man has managed to get you involved in some
way; but I am sure papa could set it to rights, if you would only
make a friend of him, and tell him all--"

"No, Molly," said Cynthia, "I can't, and there's an end of it. You
may if you like, only let me leave the house first; give me that much
time."

"You know I would never tell anything you wished me not to tell,
Cynthia," said Molly, deeply hurt.

"Would you not, darling?" said Cynthia, taking her hand. "Will you
promise me that? quite a sacred promise?--for it would be such a
comfort to me to tell you all, now you know so much."

"Yes! I'll promise not to tell. You should not have doubted me," said
Molly, still a little sorrowfully.

"Very well. I trust to you. I know I may."

"But do think of telling papa, and getting him to help you,"
persevered Molly.

"Never," said Cynthia, resolutely, but more quietly than before.
"Do you think I forget what he said at the time of that wretched
Mr. Coxe; how severe he was, and how long I was in disgrace, if
indeed I'm out of it now? I am one of those people, as mamma says
sometimes--I cannot live with persons who don't think well of me.
It may be a weakness, or a sin,--I'm sure I don't know, and I don't
care; but I really cannot be happy in the same house with any one who
knows my faults, and thinks that they are greater than my merits. Now
you know your father would do that. I have often told you that he
(and you too, Molly,) had a higher standard than I had ever known.
Oh, I couldn't bear it; if he were to know he would be so angry with
me--he would never get over it, and I have so liked him! I do so like
him!"

"Well, never mind, dear; he shall not know," said Molly, for Cynthia
was again becoming hysterical,--"at least, we'll say no more about it
now."

"And you'll never say any more--never--promise me," said Cynthia,
taking her hand eagerly.

"Never till you give me leave. Now do let me see if I cannot help
you. Lie down on the bed, and I'll sit by you, and let us talk it
over."

But Cynthia sat down again in the chair by the dressing-table.

"When did it all begin?" said Molly, after a long pause of silence.

"Long ago--four or five years. I was such a child to be left all to
myself. It was the holidays, and mamma was away visiting, and the
Donaldsons asked me to go with them to the Worcester Festival. You
can't fancy how pleasant it all sounded, especially to me. I had been
shut up in that great dreary house at Ashcombe, where mamma had her
school; it belonged to Lord Cumnor, and Mr. Preston as his agent had
to see it all painted and papered; but, besides that, he was very
intimate with us; I believe mamma thought--no, I'm not sure about
that, and I have enough blame to lay at her door, to prevent my
telling you anything that may be only fancy--"

Then she paused and sate still for a minute or two, recalling the
past. Molly was struck by the aged and careworn expression which had
taken temporary hold of the brilliant and beautiful face; she could
see from that how much Cynthia must have suffered from this hidden
trouble of hers.

"Well! at any rate we were intimate with him, and he came a great
deal about the house, and knew as much as any one of mamma's affairs,
and all the ins and outs of her life. I'm telling you this in order
that you may understand how natural it was for me to answer his
questions when he came one day and found me, not crying, for you know
I'm not much given to that, in spite of to-day's exposure of myself;
but fretting and fuming because, though mamma had written word I
might go with the Donaldsons, she had never said how I was to get any
money for the journey, much less for anything of dress, and I had
outgrown all my last year's frocks, and as for gloves and boots--in
short, I really had hardly clothes decent enough for church--"

"Why didn't you write to her and tell her all this?" said Molly, half
afraid of appearing to cast blame by her very natural question.

"I wish I had her letter to show you; you must have seen some of
mamma's letters, though; don't you know how she always seems to
leave out just the important point of every fact? In this case she
descanted largely on the enjoyment she was having, and the kindness
she was receiving, and her wish that I could have been with her, and
her gladness that I too was going to have some pleasure; but the only
thing that would have been of real use to me she left out, and that
was where she was going to next. She mentioned that she was leaving
the house she was stopping at the day after she wrote, and that
she should be at home by a certain date; but I got the letter on a
Saturday, and the festival began the next Tuesday--"

"Poor Cynthia!" said Molly. "Still, if you had written, your letter
might have been forwarded. I don't mean to be hard, only I do so
dislike the thought of your ever having made a friend of that man."

"Ah!" said Cynthia, sighing. "How easy it is to judge rightly
after one sees what evil comes from judging wrongly! I was only a
young girl, hardly more than a child, and he was a friend to us
then--excepting mamma, the only friend I knew; the Donaldsons were
only kind and good-natured acquaintances."

"I am sorry," said Molly, humbly, "I have been so happy with papa.
I hardly can understand how different it must have been with you."

"Different! I should think so. The worry about money made me sick of
my life. We might not say we were poor, it would have injured the
school; but I would have stinted and starved if mamma and I had got
on as happily together as we might have done--as you and Mr. Gibson
do. It was not the poverty; it was that she never seemed to care to
have me with her. As soon as the holidays came round she was off to
some great house or another; and I daresay I was at a very awkward
age to have me lounging about in the drawing-room when callers came.
Girls at the age I was then are so terribly keen at scenting out
motives, and putting in their disagreeable questions as to the little
twistings and twirlings and vanishings of conversation; they've no
distinct notion of what are the truths and falsehoods of polite
life. At any rate, I was very much in mamma's way, and I felt it. Mr.
Preston seemed to feel it too for me; and I was very grateful to him
for kind words and sympathetic looks--crumbs of kindness which would
have dropped under your table unnoticed. So this day, when he came
to see how the workmen were getting on, he found me in the deserted
schoolroom, looking at my faded summer bonnet and some old ribbons
I had been sponging, and half-worn-out gloves--a sort of rag-fair
spread out on the deal table. I was in a regular passion with only
looking at that shabbiness. He said he was so glad to hear I was
going to this festival with the Donaldsons; old Betty, our servant,
had told him the news, I believe. But I was so perplexed about money,
and my vanity was so put out about my shabby dress, that I was in a
pet, and said I shouldn't go. He sate down on the table, and little
by little he made me tell him all my troubles. I do sometimes think
he was very nice in those days. Somehow I never felt as if it was
wrong or foolish or anything to accept his offer of money at the
time. He had twenty pounds in his pocket, he said, and really didn't
know what to do with it,--shouldn't want it for months; I could repay
it, or rather mamma could, when it suited her. She must have known
I should want money, and most likely thought I should apply to him.
Twenty pounds wouldn't be too much, I must take it all, and so on.
I knew--at least I thought I knew--that I should never spend twenty
pounds; but I thought I could give him back what I didn't want, and
so--well, that was the beginning! It doesn't sound so very wrong,
does it, Molly?"

"No," said Molly, hesitatingly. She did not wish to make herself into
a hard judge, and yet she did so dislike Mr. Preston. Cynthia went
on,--

"Well, what with boots and gloves, and a bonnet and a mantle, and a
white muslin gown, which was made for me before I left on Tuesday,
and a silk gown that followed to the Donaldsons', and my journeys,
and all, there was very little left of the twenty pounds, especially
when I found I must get a ball-dress in Worcester, for we were all
to go to the Ball. Mrs. Donaldson gave me my ticket, but she rather
looked grave at my idea of going to the Ball in my white muslin,
which I had already worn two evenings at their house. Oh dear! how
pleasant it must be to be rich! You know," continued Cynthia, smiling
a very little, "I can't help being aware that I'm pretty, and that
people admire me very much. I found it out first at the Donaldsons'.
I began to think I did look pretty in my fine new clothes, and I saw
that other people thought so too. I was certainly the belle of the
house, and it was very pleasant to feel my power. The last day or
two of that gay week Mr. Preston joined our party. The last time he
had seen me was when I was dressed in shabby clothes too small for
me, half-crying in my solitude, neglected and penniless. At the
Donaldsons' I was a little queen; and as I said, fine feathers make
fine birds, and all the people were making much of me; and at that
Ball, which was the first night he came, I had more partners than I
knew what to do with. I suppose he really did fall in love with me
then. I don't think he had done so before. And then I began to feel
how awkward it was to be in his debt. I couldn't give myself airs to
him as I did to others. Oh! it was so awkward and uncomfortable! But
I liked him, and felt him as a friend all the time. The last day I
was walking in the garden along with the others, and I thought I
would tell him how much I had enjoyed myself, and how happy I had
been, all thanks to his twenty pounds (I was beginning to feel like
Cinderella when the clock was striking twelve), and to tell him it
should be repaid to him as soon as possible, though I turned sick
at the thought of telling mamma, and knew enough of our affairs to
understand how very difficult it would be to muster up the money. The
end of our talk came very soon; for, almost to my terror, he began to
talk violent love to me, and to beg me to promise to marry him. I was
so frightened, that I ran away to the others. But that night I got
a letter from him, apologizing for startling me, renewing his offer,
his entreaties for a promise of marriage, to be fulfilled at any date
I would please to name--in fact, a most urgent love-letter, and in
it a reference to my unlucky debt, which was to be a debt no longer,
only an advance of the money to be hereafter mine if only-- You can
fancy it all, Molly, better than I can remember it to tell it you."

"And what did you say?" asked Molly, breathless.

"I did not answer it at all until another letter came, entreating for
a reply. By that time mamma had come home, and the old daily pressure
and plaint of poverty had come on. Mary Donaldson wrote to me often,
singing the praises of Mr. Preston as enthusiastically as if she had
been bribed to do it. I had seen him a very popular man in their set,
and I liked him well enough, and felt grateful to him. So I wrote and
gave him my promise to marry him when I was twenty, but it was to be
a secret till then. And I tried to forget I had ever borrowed money
of him, but somehow as soon as I felt pledged to him I began to hate
him. I couldn't endure his eagerness of greeting if ever he found me
alone; and mamma began to suspect, I think. I cannot tell you all the
ins and outs; in fact, I didn't understand them at the time, and I
don't remember clearly how it all happened now. But I know that Lady
Cuxhaven sent mamma some money to be applied to my education, as
she called it; and mamma seemed very much put out and in very low
spirits, and she and I didn't get on at all together. So, of course,
I never ventured to name the hateful twenty pounds to her, but went
on trying to think that if I was to marry Mr. Preston, it need never
be paid--very mean and wicked, I daresay; but oh, Molly, I've been
punished for it, for how I abhor that man."

"But why? When did you begin to dislike him? You seem to have taken
it very passively all this time."

"I don't know. It was growing upon me before I went to that school
at Boulogne. He made me feel as if I was in his power; and by too
often reminding me of my engagement to him, he made me critical of
his words and ways. There was an insolence in his manner to mamma,
too. Ah! you're thinking that I'm not too respectful a daughter--and
perhaps not; but I couldn't bear his covert sneers at her faults, and
I hated his way of showing what he called his 'love' for me. Then,
after I had been a _semestre_ at Mdme. Lefevre's, a new English girl
came--a cousin of his, who knew but little of me. Now, Molly, you
must forget as soon as I've told you what I'm going to say; and she
used to talk so much and perpetually about her cousin Robert--he was
the great man of the family, evidently--and how he was so handsome,
and every lady of the land in love with him,--a lady of title into
the bargain."

"Lady Harriet! I daresay," said Molly, indignantly.

"I don't know," said Cynthia, wearily. "I didn't care at the time,
and I don't care now; for she went on to say there was a very pretty
widow too, who made desperate love to him. He had often laughed with
them at all her little advances, which she thought he didn't see
through. And, oh! and this was the man I had promised to marry, and
gone into debt to, and written love-letters to! So now you understand
it all, Molly."

"No, I don't yet. What did you do on hearing how he had spoken about
your mother?"

"There was but one thing to do. I wrote and told him I hated him, and
would never, never marry him, and would pay him back his money and
the interest on it as soon as ever I could."

"Well?"

"And Mdme. Lefevre brought me back my letter,--unopened, I will say;
and told me that she didn't allow letters to gentlemen to be sent by
the pupils of her establishment unless she had previously seen their
contents. I told her he was a family friend, the agent who managed
mamma's affairs--I really could not stick at the truth; but she
wouldn't let it go; and I had to see her burn it, and to give her my
promise I wouldn't write again before she would consent not to tell
mamma. So I had to calm down and wait till I came home."

"But you didn't see him then; at least, not for some time?"

"No, but I could write; and I began to try and save up my money to
pay him."

"What did he say to your letter?"

"Oh, at first he pretended not to believe I could be in earnest; he
thought it was only pique, or a temporary offence to be apologized
for and covered over with passionate protestations."

"And afterwards?"

"He condescended to threats; and, what is worse, then I turned
coward. I couldn't bear to have it all known and talked about, and
my silly letters shown--oh, such letters! I cannot bear to think of
them, beginning, 'My dearest Robert,' to that man--"

"But, oh, Cynthia, how could you go and engage yourself to Roger?"
asked Molly.

"Why not?" said Cynthia, sharply turning round upon her. "I was
free--I am free; it seemed a way of assuring myself that I was quite
free; and I did like Roger--it was such a comfort to be brought into
contact with people who could be relied upon; and I was not a stock
or a stone that I could fail to be touched with his tender, unselfish
love, so different to Mr. Preston's. I know you don't think me good
enough for him; and, of course, if all this comes out, he won't think
me good enough either" (falling into a plaintive tone very touching
to hear); "and sometimes I think I'll give him up, and go off to some
fresh life amongst strangers; and once or twice I've thought I would
marry Mr. Preston out of pure revenge, and have him for ever in my
power--only I think I should have the worst of it; for he is cruel
in his very soul--tigerish, with his beautiful striped skin and
relentless heart. I have so begged and begged him to let me go
without exposure."

"Never mind the exposure," said Molly. "It will recoil far more on
him than harm you."

Cynthia went a little paler. "But I said things in those letters
about mamma. I was quick-eyed enough to all her faults, and hardly
understood the force of her temptations; and he says he will show
those letters to your father, unless I consent to acknowledge our
engagement."

"He shall not!" said Molly, rising up in her indignation, and
standing before Cynthia almost as resolutely fierce as if she were
in the very presence of Mr. Preston himself. "I am not afraid of him.
He dare not insult me, or if he does I don't care. I will ask him for
those letters, and see if he will dare to refuse me."

"You don't know him," said Cynthia, shaking her head. "He has made
many an appointment with me, just as if he would take back the
money--which has been sealed up ready for him this four months; or as
if he would give me back my letters. Poor, poor Roger! How little he
thinks of all this! When I want to write words of love to him I pull
myself up, for I have written words as affectionate to that other
man. And if Mr. Preston ever guessed that Roger and I were engaged,
he would manage to be revenged on both him and me, by giving us as
much pain as he could with those unlucky letters--written when I was
not sixteen, Molly,--only seven of them! They are like a mine under
my feet, which may blow up any day; and down will come father and
mother and all." She ended bitterly enough, though her words were so
light.

"How can I get them?" said Molly, thinking: "for get them I will.
With papa to back me, he dare not refuse."

"Ah! But that's just the thing. He knows I'm afraid of your father's
hearing of it all, more than of any one else."

"And yet he thinks he loves you!"

"It is his way of loving. He says often enough he doesn't care what
he does so that he gets me to be his wife; and that after that he is
sure he can make me love him." Cynthia began to cry, out of weariness
of body and despair of mind. Molly's arms were round her in a minute,
and she pressed the beautiful head to her bosom, and laid her own
cheek upon it, and hushed her up with lulling words, just as if
Cynthia were a little child.

"Oh, it is such a comfort to have told you all!" murmured Cynthia.
And Molly made reply,--"I am sure we have right on our side; and that
makes me certain he must and shall give up the letters."

"And take the money?" added Cynthia, lifting her head, and looking
eagerly into Molly's face. "He must take the money. Oh, Molly, you
can never manage it all without its coming out to your father! And I
would far rather go out to Russia as a governess. I almost think I
would rather--no, not that," said she, shuddering away from what she
was going to say. "But he must not know--please, Molly, he must not
know. I couldn't bear it. I don't know what I might not do. You'll
promise me never to tell him,--or mamma?"

"I never will. You do not think I would for anything short of
saving--" She was going to have said, "saving you and Roger from
pain." But Cynthia broke in,--

"For nothing. No reason whatever must make you tell your father. If
you fail, you fail, and I will love you for ever for trying; but I
shall be no worse off than before. Better, indeed; for I shall have
the comfort of your sympathy. But promise me not to tell Mr. Gibson."

"I have promised once," said Molly, "but I promise again; so now do
go to bed, and try and rest. You are looking as white as a sheet;
you'll be ill if you don't get some rest; and it's past two o'clock,
and you're shivering with cold."

So they wished each other good-night. But when Molly got into her
room all her spirit left her; and she threw herself down on her bed,
dressed as she was, for she had no heart left for anything. If Roger
ever heard of it all by any chance, she felt how it would disturb his
love for Cynthia. And yet was it right to conceal it from him? She
must try and persuade Cynthia to tell it all straight out to him as
soon as he returned to England. A full confession on her part would
wonderfully lessen any pain he might have on first hearing of it.
She lost herself in thoughts of Roger--how he would feel, what he
would say, how that meeting would come to pass, where he was at that
very time, and so on, till she suddenly plucked herself up, and
recollected what she herself had offered and promised to do. Now that
the first fervour was over, she saw the difficulties clearly; and the
foremost of all was how she was to manage to have an interview with
Mr. Preston. How had Cynthia managed? and the letters that had passed
between them too? Unwillingly, Molly was compelled to perceive that
there must have been a great deal of underhand work going on beneath
Cynthia's apparent openness of behaviour; and still more unwillingly
she began to be afraid that she herself might be led into the
practice. But she would try and walk in a straight path; and if she
did wander out of it, it should only be to save pain to those whom
she loved.




CHAPTER XLIV.

MOLLY GIBSON TO THE RESCUE.


It seemed curious enough, after the storms of the night, to meet in
smooth tranquillity at breakfast. Cynthia was pale; but she talked as
quietly as usual about all manner of indifferent things, while Molly
sate silent, watching and wondering, and becoming convinced that
Cynthia must have gone through a long experience of concealing her
real thoughts and secret troubles before she could have been able to
put on such a semblance of composure. Among the letters that came
in that morning was one from the London Kirkpatricks; but not from
Helen, Cynthia's own particular correspondent. Her sister wrote
to apologize for Helen, who was not well, she said: had had the
influenza, which had left her very weak and poorly.

"Let her come down here for change of air," said Mr. Gibson. "The
country at this time of the year is better than London, except when
the place is surrounded by trees. Now our house is well drained, high
up, gravel-soil, and I'll undertake to doctor her for nothing."

"It would be charming," said Mrs. Gibson, rapidly revolving in
her mind the changes necessary in her household economy before
receiving a young lady accustomed to such a household as Mr.
Kirkpatrick's,--calculating the consequent inconveniences, and
weighing them against the probable advantages, even while she spoke.
"Should not you like it, Cynthia? and Molly too? You then, dear,
would become acquainted with one of the girls, and I have no doubt
you would be asked back again, which would be so very nice!"

"And I shouldn't let her go," said Mr. Gibson, who had acquired an
unfortunate facility of reading his wife's thoughts.

"Dear Helen!" went on Mrs. Gibson, "I should so like to nurse her! We
would make your consulting-room into her own private sitting-room,
my dear."--(It is hardly necessary to say that the scales had been
weighed down by the inconveniences of having a person behind the
scenes for several weeks). "For with an invalid so much depends on
tranquillity. In the drawing-room, for instance, she might constantly
be disturbed by callers; and the dining-room is so--so what shall I
call it? so dinnery,--the smell of meals never seems to leave it; it
would have been different if dear papa had allowed me to throw out
that window--"

"Why can't she have the dressing-room for her bedroom, and the little
room opening out of the drawing-room for her sitting-room?" asked Mr.
Gibson.

"The library," for by this name Mrs. Gibson chose to dignify what had
formerly been called the book-closet--"why, it would hardly hold a
sofa, besides the books and the writing-table; and there are draughts
everywhere. No, my dear, we had better not ask her at all, her own
home is comfortable at any rate!"

"Well, well!" said Mr. Gibson, seeing that he was to be worsted, and
not caring enough about the matter to show fight. "Perhaps you're
right. It's a case of luxury _versus_ fresh air. Some people suffer
more from want of the one than from want of the other. You know I
shall be glad to see her if she likes to come, and take us as we are,
but I can't give up the consulting-room. It's a necessity; our daily
bread!"

"I'll write and tell them how kind Mr. Gibson is," said his wife in
high contentment, as her husband left the room. "They'll be just as
much obliged to him as if she had come!"

Whether it was Helen's illness, or from some other cause, after
breakfast Cynthia became very flat and absent, and this lasted all
day long. Molly understood now why her moods had been so changeable
for many months, and was tender and forbearing with her accordingly.
Towards evening, when the two girls were left alone, Cynthia came and
stood over Molly, so that her face could not be seen.

"Molly," said she, "will you do it? Will you do what you said last
night? I've been thinking of it all day, and sometimes I believe he
would give you back the letters if you asked him; he might fancy--at
any rate it's worth trying, if you don't very much dislike it."

Now it so happened that with every thought she had given to it, Molly
disliked the idea of the proposed interview with Mr. Preston more and
more; but it was, after all, her own offer, and she neither could nor
would draw back from it; it might do good; she did not see how it
could possibly do harm. So she gave her consent, and tried to conceal
her distaste, which grew upon her more and more as Cynthia hastily
arranged the details.

"You shall meet him in the avenue leading from the park lodge up to
the Towers. He can come in one way from the Towers, where he has
often business--he has pass-keys everywhere--you can go in as we have
often done by the lodge--you need not go far."

It did strike Molly that Cynthia must have had some experience in
making all these arrangements; and she ventured to ask how he was
to be informed of all this. Cynthia only reddened and replied, "Oh!
never mind! He will only be too glad to come; you heard him say
he wished to discuss the affair more; it is the first time the
appointment has come from my side. If I can but once be free--oh,
Molly, I will love you, and be grateful to you all my life!"

Molly thought of Roger, and that thought prompted her next speech.

"It must be horrible--I think I'm very brave--but I don't think I
could have--could have accepted even Roger, with a half-cancelled
engagement hanging over me." She blushed as she spoke.

"You forget how I detest Mr. Preston!" said Cynthia. "It was that,
more than any excess of love for Roger, that made me thankful to be
at least as securely pledged to some one else. He did not want to
call it an engagement, but I did; because it gave me the feeling of
assurance that I was free from Mr. Preston. And so I am! all but
these letters. Oh! if you can but make him take back his abominable
money, and get me my letters! Then we would bury it all in oblivion,
and he could marry somebody else, and I would marry Roger, and no one
would be the wiser. After all, it was only what people call 'youthful
folly.' And you may tell Mr. Preston that as soon as he makes my
letters public, shows them to your father or anything, I'll go away
from Hollingford, and never come back."

Loaded with many such messages, which she felt that she should never
deliver, not really knowing what she should say, hating the errand,
not satisfied with Cynthia's manner of speaking about her relations
to Roger, oppressed with shame and complicity in conduct which
appeared to her deceitful, yet willing to bear all and brave all,
if she could once set Cynthia in a straight path--in a clear space,
and almost more pitiful to her friend's great distress and possible
disgrace, than able to give her that love which involves perfect
sympathy, Molly set out on her walk towards the appointed place. It
was a cloudy, blustering day, and the noise of the blowing wind among
the nearly leafless branches of the great trees filled her ears, as
she passed through the park-gates and entered the avenue. She walked
quickly, instinctively wishing to get her blood up, and have no time
for thought. But there was a bend in the avenue about a quarter of a
mile from the lodge; after that bend it was a straight line up to the
great house, now emptied of its inhabitants. Molly did not like going
quite out of sight of the lodge, and she stood facing it, close by
the trunk of one of the trees. Presently she heard a step coming over
the grass. It was Mr. Preston. He saw a woman's figure, half-behind
the trunk of a tree, and made no doubt that it was Cynthia. But
when he came nearer, almost close, the figure turned round, and,
instead of the brilliantly coloured face of Cynthia, he met the pale
resolved look of Molly. She did not speak to greet him; but though
he felt sure from the general aspect of pallor and timidity that
she was afraid of him, her steady gray eyes met his with courageous
innocence.

"Is Cynthia unable to come?" asked he, perceiving that she expected
him.

"I did not know you thought that you should meet her," said Molly, a
little surprised. In her simplicity she had believed that Cynthia had
named that it was she, Molly Gibson, who would meet Mr. Preston at a
given time and place; but Cynthia had been too worldly-wise for that,
and had decoyed him thither by a vaguely worded note, which, while
avoiding actual falsehood, had led him to believe that she herself
would give him the meeting.

"She said she should be here," said Mr. Preston, extremely annoyed at
being entrapped, as he now felt that he had been, into an interview
with Miss Gibson. Molly hesitated a little before she spoke. He was
determined not to break the silence; as she had intruded herself into
the affair, she should find her situation as awkward as possible.

"At any rate she sent me here to meet you," said Molly. "She has told
me exactly how matters stand between you and her."

"Has she?" sneered he. "She is not always the most open or reliable
person in the world!"

Molly reddened. She perceived the impertinence of the tone; and her
temper was none of the coolest. But she mastered herself and gained
courage by so doing.

"You should not speak so of the person you profess to wish to have
for your wife. But putting all that aside, you have some letters of
hers that she wishes to have back again."

"I daresay."

"And that you have no right to keep."

"No legal, or no moral right? which do you mean?"

"I do not know; simply you have no right at all, as a gentleman, to
keep a girl's letters when she asks for them back again, much less to
hold them over her as a threat."

"I see you do know all, Miss Gibson," said he, changing his manner to
one of more respect. "At least she has told you her story from her
point of view, her side; now you must hear mine. She promised me as
solemnly as ever woman--"

"She was not a woman, she was only a girl, barely sixteen."

"Old enough to know what she was doing; but I'll call her a girl if
you like. She promised me solemnly to be my wife, making the one
stipulation of secrecy, and a certain period of waiting; she wrote
me letters repeating this promise, and confidential enough to prove
that she considered herself bound to me by such an implied relation.
I don't give in to humbug--I don't set myself up as a saint--and in
most ways I can look after my own interests pretty keenly; you know
enough of her position as a penniless girl, and at that time, with
no influential connections to take the place of wealth, and help me
on in the world, it was as sincere and unworldly a passion as ever
man felt; she must say so herself. I might have married two or three
girls with plenty of money; one of them was handsome enough, and not
at all reluctant."

Molly interrupted him: she was chafed at the conceit of his manner.
"I beg your pardon, but I do not want to hear accounts of young
ladies whom you might have married; I come here simply on behalf of
Cynthia, who does not like you, and who does not wish to marry you."

"Well, then, I must make her 'like' me, as you call it. She did
'like' me once, and made promises which she will find it requires the
consent of two people to break. I don't despair of making her love me
as much as ever she did, according to her letters, at least, when we
are married."

"She will never marry you," said Molly, firmly.

"Then if she ever honours any one else with her preference, he shall
be allowed the perusal of her letters to me."

Molly almost could have laughed, she was so secure and certain
that Roger would never read letters offered to him under these
circumstances; but then she thought that he would feel such pain at
the whole affair, and at the contact with Mr. Preston, especially if
he had not heard of it from Cynthia first, and if she, Molly, could
save him pain she would. Before she could settle what to say, Mr.
Preston spoke again.

"You said the other day that Cynthia was engaged. May I ask whom to?"

"No," said Molly, "you may not. You heard her say it was not an
engagement. It is not exactly; and if it were a full engagement, do
you think, after what you last said, I should tell you to whom? But
you may be sure of this, he would never read a line of your letters.
He is too-- No! I won't speak of him before you. You could never
understand him."

"It seems to me that this mysterious 'he' is a very fortunate person
to have such a warm defender in Miss Gibson, to whom he is not at
all engaged," said Mr. Preston, with so disagreeable a look on his
face that Molly suddenly found herself on the point of bursting into
tears. But she rallied herself, and worked on--for Cynthia first, and
for Roger as well.

"No honourable man or woman will read your letters, and if any people
do read them, they will be so much ashamed of it that they won't dare
to speak of them. What use can they be of to you?"

"They contain Cynthia's reiterated promises of marriage," replied he.

"She says she would rather leave Hollingford for ever, and go out to
earn her bread, than marry you."

His face fell a little. He looked so bitterly mortified, that Molly
was almost sorry for him.

"Does she say that to you in cold blood? Do you know you are telling
me very hard truths, Miss Gibson? If they are truths, that is to
say," he continued, recovering himself a little. "Young ladies are
very fond of the words 'hate' and 'detest.' I've known many who have
applied them to men whom they were all the time hoping to marry."

"I cannot tell about other people," said Molly; "I only know that
Cynthia does--" Here she hesitated for a moment; she felt for his
pain, and so she hesitated; but then she brought it out--"does as
nearly hate you as anybody like her ever does hate."

"Like her?" said he, repeating the words almost unconsciously,
seizing on anything to try and hide his mortification.

"I mean, I should hate worse," said Molly in a low voice.

But he did not attend much to her answer. He was working the point of
his stick into the turf, and his eyes were bent on it.

"So now would you mind sending her back the letters by me? I do
assure you that you cannot make her marry you."

"You are very simple, Miss Gibson," said he, suddenly lifting up
his head. "I suppose you don't know that there is any other feeling
that can be gratified, except love. Have you never heard of revenge?
Cynthia has cajoled me with promises, and little as you or she may
believe me--well, it's no use speaking of that. I don't mean to let
her go unpunished. You may tell her that. I shall keep the letters,
and make use of them as I see fit when the occasion arises."

Molly was miserably angry with herself for her mismanagement of the
affair. She had hoped to succeed: she had only made matters worse.
What new argument could she use? Meanwhile he went on, lashing
himself up as he thought how the two girls must have talked him over,
bringing in wounded vanity to add to the rage of disappointed love.

"Mr. Osborne Hamley may hear of their contents, though he may be too
honourable to read them. Nay, even your father may hear whispers;
and if I remember them rightly, Miss Cynthia Kirkpatrick does not
always speak in the most respectful terms of the lady who is now Mrs.
Gibson. There are--"

"Stop," said Molly. "I won't hear anything out of these letters,
written, when she was almost without friends, to you, whom she looked
upon as a friend! But I have thought of what I will do next. I give
you fair warning. If I had not been foolish, I should have told my
father, but Cynthia made me promise that I would not. So I will tell
it all, from beginning to end, to Lady Harriet, and ask her to speak
to her father. I feel sure that she will do it; and I don't think you
will dare to refuse Lord Cumnor."

He felt at once that he should not dare; that, clever land-agent as
he was, and high up in the earl's favour on that account, yet that
the conduct of which he had been guilty in regard to the letters, and
the threats which he had held out respecting them, were just what
no gentleman, no honourable man, no manly man, could put up with in
any one about him. He knew that much, and he wondered how she, the
girl standing before him, had been clever enough to find it out. He
forgot himself for an instant in admiration of her. There she stood,
frightened, yet brave, not letting go her hold on what she meant to
do, even when things seemed most against her; and besides, there was
something that struck him most of all perhaps, and which shows the
kind of man he was--he perceived that Molly was as unconscious that
he was a young man, and she a young woman, as if she had been a pure
angel of heaven. Though he felt that he would have to yield, and give
up the letters, he was not going to do it at once; and while he was
thinking what to say, so as still to evade making any concession till
he had had time to think over it, he, with his quick senses all about
him, heard the trotting of a horse cranching quickly along over the
gravel of the drive. A moment afterwards, Molly's perception overtook
his. He could see the startled look overspread her face; and in an
instant she would have run away, but before the first rush was made,
Mr. Preston laid his hand firmly on her arm.

"Keep quiet. You must be seen. You, at any rate, have done nothing to
be ashamed of."

As he spoke, Mr. Sheepshanks came round the bend of the road and was
close upon them. Mr. Preston saw, if Molly did not, the sudden look
of intelligence that dawned upon the shrewd ruddy face of the old
gentleman--saw, but did not much heed. He went forwards and spoke to
Mr. Sheepshanks, who made a halt right before them.

"Miss Gibson! your servant. Rather a blustering day for a young lady
to be out,--and cold, I should say, for standing still too long; eh,
Preston?" poking his whip at the latter in a knowing manner.

"Yes," said Mr. Preston; "and I'm afraid I have kept Miss Gibson too
long standing."

Molly did not know what to say or do; so she only bowed a silent
farewell, and turned away to go home, feeling very heavy at heart at
the non-success of her undertaking. For she did not know how she had
conquered, in fact, although Mr. Preston might not as yet acknowledge
it even to himself. Before she was out of hearing, she heard Mr.
Sheepshanks say,--

"Sorry to have disturbed your tÉte-ł-tÉte, Preston," but though she
heard the words, their implied sense did not sink into her mind; she
was only feeling how she had gone out glorious and confident, and was
coming back to Cynthia defeated.

Cynthia was on the watch for her return, and, rushing downstairs,
dragged Molly into the dining-room.

"Well, Molly? Oh! I see you haven't got them. After all, I
never expected it." She sate down, as if she could get over her
disappointment better in that position, and Molly stood like a guilty
person before her.

"I am so sorry; I did all I could; we were interrupted at last--Mr.
Sheepshanks rode up."

"Provoking old man! Do you think you should have persuaded him to
give up the letters if you had had more time?"

"I don't know. I wish Mr. Sheepshanks hadn't come up just then. I
didn't like his finding me standing talking to Mr. Preston."

"Oh! I daresay he'd never think anything about it. What did he--Mr.
Preston--say?"

"He seemed to think you were fully engaged to him, and that these
letters were the only proof he had. I think he loves you in his way."

"His way, indeed!" said Cynthia, scornfully.

"The more I think of it, the more I see it would be better for papa
to speak to him. I did say I would tell it all to Lady Harriet, and
get Lord Cumnor to make him give up the letters. But it would be very
awkward."

"Very!" said Cynthia, gloomily. "But he would see it was only a
threat."

"But I will do it in a moment, if you like. I meant what I said; only
I feel that papa would manage it best of all, and more privately."

"I'll tell you what, Molly--you're bound by a promise, you know, and
cannot tell Mr. Gibson without breaking your solemn word--but it's
just this: I'll leave Hollingford and never come back again, if ever
your father hears of this affair; there!" Cynthia stood up now, and
began to fold up Molly's shawl, in her nervous excitement.

"Oh, Cynthia--Roger!" was all that Molly said.

"Yes, I know! you need not remind me of him. But I'm not going
to live in the house with any one who may be always casting up
in his mind the things he had heard against me--things--faults,
perhaps--which sound so much worse than they really are. I was so
happy when I first came here; you all liked me, and admired me, and
thought well of me, and now-- Why, Molly, I can see the difference
in you already. You carry your thoughts in your face--I have read
them there these two days--you've been thinking, 'How Cynthia must
have deceived me; keeping up a correspondence all this time--having
half-engagements to two men!' You've been more full of that than
of pity for me as a girl who has always been obliged to manage for
herself, without any friend to help her and protect her."

Molly was silent. There was a great deal of truth in what Cynthia was
saying: and yet a great deal of falsehood. For, through all this long
forty-eight hours, Molly had loved Cynthia dearly; and had been more
weighed down by the position the latter was in than Cynthia herself.
She also knew--but this was a second thought following on the
other--that she had suffered much pain in trying to do her best
in this interview with Mr. Preston. She had been tried beyond her
strength: and the great tears welled up into her eyes, and fell
slowly down her cheeks.

"Oh! what a brute I am!" said Cynthia, kissing them away. "I see--I
know it is the truth, and I deserve it--but I need not reproach you."

"You did not reproach me!" said Molly, trying to smile. "I have
thought something of what you said--but I do love you dearly--dearly,
Cynthia--I should have done just the same as you did."

"No, you would not. Your grain is different, somehow."




CHAPTER XLV.

CONFIDENCES.


All the rest of that day Molly was depressed and not well. Having
anything to conceal was so unusual--almost so unprecedented a
circumstance with her that it preyed upon her in every way.

It was a nightmare that she could not shake off; she did so wish to
forget it all, and yet every little occurrence seemed to remind her
of it. The next morning's post brought several letters; one from
Roger for Cynthia, and Molly, letterless herself, looked at Cynthia
as she read it, with wistful sadness. It appeared to Molly as though
Cynthia should have no satisfaction in these letters, until she had
told him what was her exact position with Mr. Preston; yet Cynthia
was colouring and dimpling up as she always did at any pretty words
of praise, or admiration, or love. But Molly's thoughts and Cynthia's
reading were both interrupted by a little triumphant sound from Mrs.
Gibson, as she pushed a letter she had just received to her husband,
with a--

"There! I must say I expected that!" Then, turning to Cynthia, she
explained--"It is a letter from uncle Kirkpatrick, love. So kind,
wishing you to go and stay with them, and help them to cheer up
Helen; poor Helen! I am afraid she is very far from well. But
we could not have had her here, without disturbing dear papa in
his consulting-room; and, though I could have relinquished my
dressing-room--he--well! so I said in my letter how you were
grieved--you above all of us, because you are such a friend of
Helen's, you know--and how you longed to be of use,--as I am sure you
do--and so now they want you to go up directly, for Helen has quite
set her heart upon it."

Cynthia's eyes sparkled. "I shall like going," said she--"all but
leaving you, Molly," she added, in a lower tone, as if suddenly
smitten with some compunction.

"Can you be ready to go by the 'Bang-up' to-night?" said Mr. Gibson;
"for, curiously enough, after more than twenty years of quiet
practice at Hollingford, I am summoned up to-day for the first time
to a consultation in London to-morrow. I'm afraid Lady Cumnor is
worse, my dear."

"You don't say so? Poor dear lady! What a shock it is to me! I'm so
glad I've had some breakfast. I could not have eaten anything."

"Nay, I only say she is worse. With her complaint, being worse may be
only a preliminary to being better. Don't take my words for more than
their literal meaning."

"Thank you. How kind and reassuring dear papa always is! About your
gowns, Cynthia?"

"Oh, they're all right, mamma, thank you. I shall be quite ready by
four o'clock. Molly, will you come with me and help me to pack? I
wanted to speak to you, dear," said she, as soon as they had gone
upstairs. "It is such a relief to get away from a place haunted by
that man; but I'm afraid you thought I was glad to leave you; and
indeed I am not." There was a little flavour of "protesting too much"
about this; but Molly did not perceive it. She only said, "Indeed
I did not. I know from my own feelings how you must dislike meeting
a man in public in a different manner from what you have done in
private. I shall try not to see Mr. Preston again for a long, long
time, I'm sure. But, Cynthia, you haven't told me one word out of
Roger's letter. Please, how is he? Has he quite got over his attack
of fever?"

"Yes, quite. He writes in very good spirits. A great deal about birds
and beasts, as usual, habits of natives, and things of that kind. You
may read from there" (indicating a place in the letter) "to there, if
you can. And I'll tell you what, I'll trust you with it, Molly, while
I pack; and that shows my sense of your honour--not but what you
might read it all, only you'd find the love-making dull; but make a
little account of where he is, and what he is doing, date, and that
sort of thing, and send it to his father."

Molly took the letter down without a word, and began to copy it at
the writing-table; often reading over what she was allowed to read;
often pausing, her cheek on her hand, her eyes on the letter, and
letting her imagination rove to the writer, and all the scenes in
which she had either seen him herself, or in which her fancy had
painted him. She was startled from her meditations by Cynthia's
sudden entrance into the drawing-room, looking the picture of glowing
delight. "No one here? What a blessing! Ah, Miss Molly, you are more
eloquent than you believe yourself. Look here!" holding up a large
full envelope, and then quickly replacing it in her pocket, as if
she was afraid of being seen. "What's the matter, sweet one?" coming
up and caressing Molly. "Is it worrying itself over that letter?
Why, don't you see these are my very own horrible letters, that I
am going to burn directly, that Mr. Preston has had the grace to
send me, thanks to you, little Molly--cuishla ma chree, pulse of
my heart,--the letters that have been hanging over my head like
somebody's sword for these two years?"

"Oh, I am so glad!" said Molly, rousing up a little. "I never thought
he would have sent them. He is better than I believed him. And now it
is all over. I am so glad! You quite think he means to give up all
claim over you by this, don't you, Cynthia?"

"He may claim, but I won't be claimed; and he has no proofs now. It
is the most charming relief; and I owe it all to you, you precious
little lady! Now there's only one thing more to be done; and if you
would but do it for me--" (coaxing and caressing while she asked the
question).

"Oh, Cynthia, don't ask me; I cannot do any more. You don't know how
sick I go when I think of yesterday, and Mr. Sheepshanks' look."

"It is only a very little thing. I won't burden your conscience with
telling you how I got my letters, but it is not through a person
I can trust with money; and I must force him to take back his
twenty-three pounds odd shillings. I have put it together at the rate
of five per cent., and it's sealed up. Oh, Molly, I should go off
with such a light heart if you would only try to get it safely to
him. It's the last thing; there would be no immediate hurry, you
know. You might meet him by chance in a shop, in the street, even at
a party--and if you only had it with you in your pocket, there would
be nothing so easy."

Molly was silent. "Papa would give it to him. There would be no harm
in that. I would tell him he must ask no questions as to what it
was."

"Very well," said Cynthia, "have it your own way. I think my way is
the best: for if any of this affair comes out-- But you've done a
great deal for me already, and I won't blame you now for declining to
do any more!"

"I do so dislike having these underhand dealings with him," pleaded
Molly.

"Underhand! just simply giving him a letter from me! If I left a note
for Miss Browning, should you dislike giving it to her?"

"You know that's very different. I could do it openly."

"And yet there might be writing in that; and there wouldn't be a
line with the money. It would only be the winding-up--the honourable,
honest winding-up of an affair which has worried me for years. But do
as you like!"

"Give it me!" said Molly. "I will try."

"There's a darling! You can but try; and if you can't give it to him
in private, without getting yourself into a scrape, why, keep it till
I come back again. He shall have it then, whether he will or no!"

Molly looked forward to her two days alone with Mrs. Gibson with very
different anticipations from those with which she had welcomed the
similar intercourse with her father. In the first place, there was no
accompanying the travellers to the inn from which the coach started;
leave-taking in the market-place was quite out of the bounds of Mrs.
Gibson's sense of propriety. Besides this, it was a gloomy, rainy
evening, and candles had to be brought in at an unusually early hour.
There would be no break for six hours--no music, no reading; but
the two ladies would sit at their worsted work, pattering away at
small-talk, with not even the usual break of dinner; for, to suit
the requirements of those who were leaving, they had already dined
early. But Mrs. Gibson really meant to make Molly happy, and tried to
be an agreeable companion, only Molly was not well, and was uneasy
about many apprehended cares and troubles--and at such hours of
indisposition as she was then passing through, apprehensions take
the shape of certainties, lying await in our paths. Molly would have
given a good deal to have shaken off all these feelings, unusual
enough to her; but the very house and furniture, and rain-blurred
outer landscape, seemed steeped with unpleasant associations, most of
them dating from the last few days.

"You and I must go on the next journey, I think, my dear," said Mrs.
Gibson, almost chiming in with Molly's wish that she could get away
from Hollingford into some new air and life, for a week or two. "We
have been stay-at-homes for a long time, and variety of scene is so
desirable for the young! But I think the travellers will be wishing
themselves at home by this nice bright fireside. 'There's no place
like home,' as the poet says. 'Mid pleasures and palaces although I
may roam,' it begins, and it's both very pretty and very true. It's a
great blessing to have such a dear little home as this, is not it,
Molly?"

"Yes," said Molly, rather drearily, having something of the "toujours
perdrix" feeling at the moment. If she could but have gone away with
her father, just for two days, how pleasant it would have been.

"To be sure, love, it would be very nice for you and me to go a
little journey all by ourselves. You and I. No one else. If it
were not such miserable weather we would have gone off on a little
impromptu tour. I've been longing for something of the kind for some
weeks; but we live such a restricted kind of life here! I declare
sometimes I get quite sick of the very sight of the chairs and tables
that I know so well. And one misses the others too! It seems so flat
and deserted without them!"

"Yes! We are very forlorn to-night; but I think it's partly owing to
the weather!"

"Nonsense, dear. I can't have you giving in to the silly fancy of
being affected by weather. Poor dear Mr. Kirkpatrick used to say, 'a
cheerful heart makes its own sunshine.' He would say it to me, in
his pretty way, whenever I was a little low--for I am a complete
barometer--you may really judge of the state of the weather by my
spirits, I have always been such a sensitive creature! It is well
for Cynthia that she does not inherit it; I don't think her easily
affected in any way, do you?"

Molly thought for a minute or two, and then replied--"No, she
certainly is not easily affected--not deeply affected perhaps I
should say."

"Many girls, for instance, would have been touched by the admiration
she excited--I may say the attentions she received when she was at
her uncle's last summer."

"At Mr. Kirkpatrick's?"

"Yes. There was Mr. Henderson, that young lawyer; that's to say, he
is studying law, but he has a good private fortune and is likely
to have more, so he can only be what I call playing at law. Mr.
Henderson was over head and ears in love with her. It is not my
fancy, although I grant mothers are partial: both Mr. and Mrs.
Kirkpatrick noticed it; and in one of Mrs. Kirkpatrick's letters,
she said that poor Mr. Henderson was going into Switzerland for the
long vacation, doubtless to try and forget Cynthia; but she really
believed he would find it only 'dragging at each remove a lengthening
chain.' I thought it such a refined quotation, and altogether worded
so prettily. You must know aunt Kirkpatrick some day, Molly, my love;
she is what I call a woman of a truly elegant mind."

"I can't help thinking it was a pity that Cynthia did not tell them
of her engagement."

"It is not an engagement, my dear! How often must I tell you that?"

"But what am I to call it?"

"I don't see why you need to call it anything. Indeed, I don't
understand what you mean by 'it.' You should always try to express
yourself intelligibly. It really is one of the first principles
of the English language. In fact, philosophers might ask what is
language given us for at all, if it is not that we may make our
meaning understood?"

"But there is something between Cynthia and Roger; they are more to
each other than I am to Osborne, for instance. What am I to call it?"

"You should not couple your name with that of any unmarried young
man; it is so difficult to teach you delicacy, child. Perhaps one may
say there is a peculiar relation between dear Cynthia and Roger, but
it is very difficult to characterize it; I have no doubt that is the
reason she shrinks from speaking about it. For, between ourselves,
Molly, I really sometimes think it will come to nothing. He is
so long away, and, privately speaking, Cynthia is not very, very
constant. I once knew her very much taken before--that little affair
is quite gone by; and she was very civil to Mr. Henderson, in her
way; I fancy she inherits it, for when I was a girl I was beset by
lovers, and could never find in my heart to shake them off. You have
not heard dear papa say anything of the old Squire, or dear Osborne,
have you? It seems so long since we have heard or seen anything of
Osborne. But he must be quite well, I think, or we should have heard
of it."

"I believe he is quite well. Some one said the other day that they
had met him riding--it was Mrs. Goodenough, now I remember--and that
he was looking stronger than he had done for years."

"Indeed! I am truly glad to hear it. I always was fond of Osborne;
and, do you know, I never really took to Roger? I respected him
and all that, of course; but to compare him with Mr. Henderson! Mr.
Henderson is so handsome and well-bred, and gets all his gloves from
Houbigant!"

It was true that they had not seen anything of Osborne Hamley for
a long time; but, as it often happens, just after they had been
speaking about him he appeared. It was on the day following Mr.
Gibson's departure that Mrs. Gibson received one of the notes, not
so common now as formerly, from the family in town, asking her to go
over to the Towers, and find a book, or a manuscript, or something or
other that Lady Cumnor wanted with all an invalid's impatience. It
was just the kind of employment she required for an amusement on a
gloomy day, and it put her into a good humour immediately. There was
a certain confidential importance about it, and it was a variety, and
it gave her the pleasant drive in a fly up the noble avenue, and the
sense of being the temporary mistress of all the grand rooms once so
familiar to her. She asked Molly to accompany her, out of an access
of kindness, but was not at all sorry when Molly excused herself and
preferred stopping at home. At eleven o'clock Mrs. Gibson was off,
all in her Sunday best (to use the servant's expression, which she
herself would so have contemned), well-dressed in order to impose on
the servants at the Towers, for there was no one else to see or to be
seen by.

"I shall not be at home until the afternoon, my dear! But I hope you
will not find it dull. I don't think you will, for you are something
like me, my love--never less alone than when alone, as one of the
great authors has justly expressed it."

Molly enjoyed the house to herself fully as much as Mrs. Gibson would
enjoy having the Towers to herself. She ventured on having her lunch
brought upon a tray into the drawing-room, so that she might eat
her sandwiches while she went on with her book. In the middle, Mr.
Osborne Hamley was announced. He came in, looking wretchedly ill in
spite of purblind Mrs. Goodenough's report of his healthy appearance.

"This call is not on you, Molly," said he, after the first greetings
were over. "I was in hopes I might have found your father at home;
I thought lunch-time was the best hour." He had sate down, as if
thoroughly glad of the rest, and fallen into a languid stooping
position, as if it had become so natural to him that no sense of what
were considered good manners sufficed to restrain him now.

"I hope you did not want to see him professionally?" said Molly,
wondering if she was wise in alluding to his health, yet urged to it
by her real anxiety.

"Yes, I did. I suppose I may help myself to a biscuit and a glass of
wine? No, don't ring for more. I could not eat it if it was here. But
I just want a mouthful; this is quite enough, thank you. When will
your father be back?"

"He was summoned up to London. Lady Cumnor is worse. I fancy there is
some operation going on; but I don't know. He will be back to-morrow
night."

"Very well. Then I must wait. Perhaps I shall be better by that time.
I think it's half fancy; but I should like your father to tell me so.
He will laugh at me, I daresay; but I don't think I shall mind that.
He always is severe on fanciful patients, isn't he, Molly?"

Molly thought that if he saw Osborne's looks just then he would
hardly think him fanciful, or be inclined to be severe. But she only
said,--"Papa enjoys a joke at everything, you know. It is a relief
after all the sorrow he sees."

"Very true. There is a great deal of sorrow in the world. I don't
think it's a very happy place after all. So Cynthia is gone to
London?" he added, after a pause. "I think I should like to have seen
her again. Poor old Roger! He loves her very dearly, Molly," he said.
Molly hardly knew how to answer him in all this; she was so struck by
the change in both voice and manner.

"Mamma has gone to the Towers," she began, at length. "Lady Cumnor
wanted several things that mamma only can find. She will be sorry to
miss you. We were speaking of you only yesterday, and she said how
long it was since we had seen you."

"I think I've grown careless; I've often felt so weary and ill that
it was all I could do to keep up a brave face before my father."

"Why did you not come and see papa?" said Molly; "or write to him?"

"I cannot tell. I drifted on, sometimes better, and sometimes worse,
till to-day I mustered up pluck, and came to hear what your father
has got to tell me: and all for no use it seems."

"I am very sorry. But it is only for two days. He shall go and see
you as soon as ever he returns."

"He must not alarm my father, remember, Molly," said Osborne, lifting
himself by the arms of his chair into an upright position and
speaking eagerly for the moment. "I wish to God Roger was at home!"
said he, falling back into the old posture.

"I can't help understanding you," said Molly. "You think yourself
very ill; but isn't it that you are tired just now?" She was not sure
if she ought to have understood what was passing in his mind; but as
she did, she could not help speaking a true reply.

"Well, sometimes I do think I'm very ill; and then, again, I think
it's only the moping life sets me fancying and exaggerating." He was
silent for some time. Then, as if he had taken a sudden resolution,
he spoke again. "You see, there are others depending upon me--upon my
health. You haven't forgotten what you heard that day in the library
at home? No, I know you haven't. I have seen the thought of it in
your eyes often since then. I didn't know you at that time. I think I
do now."

"Don't go on talking so fast," said Molly. "Rest. No one will
interrupt us; I will go on with my sewing; when you want to say
anything more I shall be listening." For she was alarmed at the
strange pallor that had come over his face.

"Thank you." After a time he roused himself, and began to speak very
quietly, as if on an indifferent matter of fact.

"The name of my wife is AimÄe. AimÄe Hamley, of course. She lives
at Bishopsfield, a village near Winchester. Write it down, but keep
it to yourself. She is a Frenchwoman, a Roman Catholic, and was a
servant. She is a thoroughly good woman. I must not say how dear she
is to me. I dare not. I meant once to have told Cynthia, but she
didn't seem quite to consider me as a brother. Perhaps she was shy of
a new relation; but you'll give my love to her, all the same. It is
a relief to think that some one else has my secret; and you are like
one of us, Molly. I can trust you almost as I can trust Roger. I feel
better already, now I feel that some one else knows the whereabouts
of my wife and child."

"Child!" said Molly, surprised. But before he could reply, Maria had
announced, "Miss Phoebe Browning."

"Fold up that paper," said he, quickly, putting something into her
hands. "It is only for yourself."




CHAPTER XLVI.

HOLLINGFORD GOSSIPS.


[Illustration (untitled)]

"My dear Molly, why didn't you come and dine with us? I said to
sister I would come and scold you well. Oh, Mr. Osborne Hamley, is
that you?" and a look of mistaken intelligence at the tÉte-ł-tÉte
she had disturbed came so perceptibly over Miss Phoebe's face that
Molly caught Osborne's sympathetic eye, and both smiled at the
notion.

"I'm sure I--well! one must sometimes--I see our dinner would have
been--" Then she recovered herself into a connected sentence. "We
only just heard of Mrs. Gibson's having a fly from the 'George,'
because sister sent our Nancy to pay for a couple of rabbits Tom
Ostler had snared, (I hope we shan't be taken up for poachers, Mr.
Osborne--snaring doesn't require a licence, I believe?) and she heard
he was gone off with the fly to the Towers with your dear mamma; for
Coxe who drives the fly in general has sprained his ankle. We had
just finished dinner, but when Nancy said Tom Ostler would not be
back till night, I said, 'Why, there's that poor dear girl left all
alone by herself, and her mother such a friend of ours,'--when she
was alive, I mean. But I'm sure I'm glad I'm mistaken."

Osborne said,--"I came to speak to Mr. Gibson, not knowing he had
gone to London, and Miss Gibson kindly gave me some of her lunch.
I must go now."

"Oh dear! I am so sorry," fluttered out Miss Phoebe, "I disturbed
you; but it was with the best intentions. I always was mal-łpropos
from a child." But Osborne was gone before she had finished her
apologies. As he left, his eyes met Molly's with a strange look
of yearning farewell that struck her at the time, and that she
remembered strongly afterwards. "Such a nice suitable thing, and I
came in the midst, and spoilt it all. I am sure you're very kind, my
dear, considering--"

"Considering what, my dear Miss Phoebe? If you are conjecturing a
love affair between Mr. Osborne Hamley and me, you never were more
mistaken in your life. I think I told you so once before. Please do
believe me."

"Oh, yes! I remember. And somehow sister got it into her head it was
Mr. Preston. I recollect."

"One guess is just as wrong as the other," said Molly, smiling, and
trying to look perfectly indifferent, but going extremely red at the
mention of Mr. Preston's name. It was very difficult for her to keep
up any conversation, for her heart was full of Osborne--his changed
appearance, his melancholy words of foreboding, and his confidences
about his wife--French, Catholic, servant. Molly could not help
trying to piece these strange facts together by imaginations of her
own, and found it very hard work to attend to kind Miss Phoebe's
unceasing patter. She came up to the point, however, when the voice
ceased; and could recall, in a mechanical manner, the echo of the
last words, which both from Miss Phoebe's look, and the dying
accent that lingered in Molly's ear, she perceived to be a question.
Miss Phoebe was asking her if she would go out with her. She was
going to Grinstead's, the bookseller of Hollingford; who, in addition
to his regular business, was the agent for the Hollingford Book
Society, received their subscriptions, kept their accounts, ordered
their books from London, and, on payment of a small salary, allowed
the Society to keep their volumes on shelves in his shop. It was
the centre of news, and the club, as it were, of the little town.
Everybody who pretended to gentility in the place belonged to it. It
was a test of gentility, indeed, rather than of education or a love
of literature. No shopkeeper would have thought of offering himself
as a member, however great his general intelligence and love of
reading; while it boasted on its list of subscribers most of the
county families in the neighbourhood, some of whom subscribed to it
as a sort of duty belonging to their station, without often using
their privilege of reading the books: while there were residents
in the little town, such as Mrs. Goodenough, who privately thought
reading a great waste of time, that might be much better employed
in sewing, and knitting, and pastry-making, but who nevertheless
belonged to it as a mark of station, just as these good, motherly
women would have thought it a terrible come-down in the world if they
had not had a pretty young servant-maid to fetch them home from the
tea-parties at night. At any rate, Grinstead's was a very convenient
place for a lounge. In that view of the Book Society every one
agreed.

Molly went upstairs to get ready to accompany Miss Phoebe; and on
opening one of her drawers she saw Cynthia's envelope, containing
the money she owed to Mr. Preston, carefully sealed up like a letter.
This was what Molly had so unwillingly promised to deliver--the last
final stroke to the affair. Molly took it up, hating it. For a time
she had forgotten it; and now it was here, facing her, and she must
try and get rid of it. She put it into her pocket for the chances
of the walk and the day, and fortune for once seemed to befriend
her; for, on their entering Grinstead's shop, in which two or three
people were now, as always, congregated, making play of examining the
books, or business of writing down the titles of new works in the
order-book, there was Mr. Preston. He bowed as they came in. He could
not help that; but, at the sight of Molly, he looked as ill-tempered
and out of humour as a man well could do. She was connected in his
mind with defeat and mortification; and besides, the sight of her
called up what he desired now, above all things, to forget; namely,
the deep conviction, received through Molly's simple earnestness,
of Cynthia's dislike to him. If Miss Phoebe had seen the scowl upon
his handsome face, she might have undeceived her sister in her
suppositions about him and Molly. But Miss Phoebe, who did not
consider it quite maidenly to go and stand close to Mr. Preston, and
survey the shelves of books in such close proximity to a gentleman,
found herself an errand at the other end of the shop, and occupied
herself in buying writing-paper. Molly fingered her valuable letter,
as it lay in her pocket; did she dare to cross over to Mr. Preston,
and give it to him, or not? While she was still undecided, shrinking
always just at the moment when she thought she had got her courage
up for action, Miss Phoebe, having finished her purchase, turned
round, and after looking a little pathetically at Mr. Preston's back,
said to Molly in a whisper--"I think we'll go to Johnson's now, and
come back for the books in a little while." So across the street to
Johnson's they went; but no sooner had they entered the draper's
shop, than Molly's conscience smote her for her cowardice, and loss
of a good opportunity. "I'll be back directly," said she, as soon as
Miss Phoebe was engaged with her purchases; and Molly ran across to
Grinstead's, without looking either to the right or the left; she had
been watching the door, and she knew that no Mr. Preston had issued
forth. She ran in; he was at the counter now, talking to Grinstead
himself; Molly put the letter into his hand, to his surprise,
and almost against his will, and turned round to go back to Miss
Phoebe. At the door of the shop stood Mrs. Goodenough, arrested in
the act of entering, staring, with her round eyes, made still rounder
and more owl-like by spectacles, to see Molly Gibson giving Mr.
Preston a letter, which he, conscious of being watched, and favouring
underhand practices habitually, put quickly into his pocket,
unopened. Perhaps, if he had had time for reflection he would not
have scrupled to put Molly to open shame, by rejecting what she so
eagerly forced upon him.

There was another long evening to be got through with Mrs. Gibson;
but on this occasion there was the pleasant occupation of dinner,
which took up at least an hour; for it was one of Mrs. Gibson's
fancies--one which Molly chafed against--to have every ceremonial
gone through in the same stately manner for two as for twenty. So,
although Molly knew full well, and her stepmother knew full well,
and Maria knew full well, that neither Mrs. Gibson nor Molly touched
dessert, it was set on the table with as much form as if Cynthia had
been at home, who delighted in almonds and raisins; or Mr. Gibson
been there, who never could resist dates, though he always protested
against "persons in their station of life having a formal dessert set
out before them every day."

And Mrs. Gibson herself apologized, as it were, to Molly to-day,
in the same words she had often used to Mr. Gibson,--"It's no
extravagance, for we need not eat it--I never do. But it looks well,
and makes Maria understand what is required in the daily life of
every family of position."

All through the evening Molly's thoughts wandered far and wide,
though she managed to keep up a show of attention to what Mrs.
Gibson was saying. She was thinking of Osborne, and his abrupt,
half-finished confidence, and his ill-looks; she was wondering when
Roger would come home, and longing for his return, as much (she said
to herself) for Osborne's sake as for her own. And then she checked
herself. What had she to do with Roger? Why should she long for his
return? It was Cynthia who was doing this; only somehow he was such
a true friend to Molly, that she could not help thinking of him as a
staff and a stay in the troublous times which appeared to lie not far
ahead--this evening. Then Mr. Preston and her little adventure with
him came uppermost. How angry he looked! How could Cynthia have
liked him even enough to get into this abominable scrape, which
was, however, all over now! And so she ran on in her fancies and
imaginations, little dreaming that that very night much talk was
going on not half-a-mile from where she sate sewing, that would prove
that the "scrape" (as she called it, in her girlish phraseology) was
not all over.

Scandal sleeps in the summer, comparatively speaking. Its nature is
the reverse of that of the dormouse. Warm ambient air, loiterings
abroad, gardenings, flowers to talk about, and preserves to make,
soothed the wicked imp to slumber in the parish of Hollingford in
summer-time. But when evenings grew short, and people gathered round
the fires, and put their feet in a circle--not on the fenders, that
was not allowed--then was the time for confidential conversation!
Or in the pauses allowed for the tea-trays to circulate among the
card-tables--when those who were peaceably inclined tried to stop
the warm discussions about "the odd trick," and the rather wearisome
feminine way of "shouldering the crutch, and showing how fields were
won"--small crumbs and scraps of daily news came up to the surface,
such as "Martindale has raised the price of his best joints a
halfpenny in the pound;" or, "It's a shame of Sir Harry to order in
another book on farriery into the Book Society; Phoebe and I tried
to read it, but really there is no general interest in it;" or, "I
wonder what Mr. Ashton will do, now Nancy is going to be married!
Why, she's been with him these seventeen years! It's a very foolish
thing for a woman of her age to be thinking of matrimony; and so I
told her, when I met her in the market-place this morning!"

So said Miss Browning on the night in question; her hand of cards
lying by her on the puce baize-covered table, while she munched the
rich pound-cake of a certain Mrs. Dawes, lately come to inhabit
Hollingford.

"Matrimony's not so bad as you think for, Miss Browning," said Mrs.
Goodenough, standing up for the holy estate into which she had twice
entered. "If I'd ha' seen Nancy, I should ha' given her my mind very
different. It's a great thing to be able to settle what you'll have
for dinner, without never a one interfering with you."

"If that's all!" said Miss Browning, drawing herself up, "I can do
that; and, perhaps, better than a woman who has a husband to please."

"No one can say as I didn't please my husbands--both on 'em, though
Jeremy was tickler in his tastes than poor Harry Beaver. But as I
used to say to 'em, 'Leave the victual to me; it's better for you
than knowing what's to come beforehand. The stomach likes to be
taken by surprise.' And neither of 'em ever repented 'em of their
confidence. You may take my word for it, beans and bacon will taste
better (and Mr. Ashton's Nancy in her own house) than all the
sweetbreads and spring chickens she's been a-doing for him this
seventeen years. But if I chose, I could tell you of something as
would interest you all a deal more than old Nancy's marriage to a
widower with nine children--only as the young folks themselves is
meeting in private, clandestine-like, it's perhaps not for me to tell
their secrets."

"I'm sure I don't want to hear of clandestine meetings between young
men and young women," said Miss Browning, throwing up her head. "It's
disgrace enough to the people themselves, I consider, if they enter
on a love affair without the proper sanction of parents. I know
public opinion has changed on the subject; but when poor Gratia was
married to Mr. Byerley, he wrote to my father without ever having so
much as paid her a compliment, or said more than the most trivial and
commonplace things to her; and my father and mother sent for her into
my father's study, and she said she was never so much frightened in
her life,--and they said it was a very good offer, and Mr. Byerley
was a very worthy man, and they hoped she would behave properly to
him when he came to supper that night. And after that he was allowed
to come twice a week till they were married. My mother and I sate at
our work in the bow-window of the Rectory drawing-room, and Gratia
and Mr. Byerley at the other end; and my mother always called my
attention to some flower or plant in the garden when it struck nine,
for that was his time for going. Without offence to the present
company, I am rather inclined to look upon matrimony as a weakness to
which some very worthy people are prone; but if they must be married,
let them make the best of it, and go through the affair with dignity
and propriety: or if there are misdoings and clandestine meetings,
and such things, at any rate, never let me hear about them! I think
it's you to play, Mrs. Dawes. You'll excuse my frankness on the
subject of matrimony! Mrs. Goodenough there can tell you I'm a very
out-spoken person."

"It's not the out-speaking, it's what you say that goes against me,
Miss Browning," said Mrs. Goodenough, affronted, yet ready to play
her card as soon as needed. And as for Mrs. Dawes, she was too
anxious to get into the genteelest of all (Hollingford) society to
object to whatever Miss Browning (who, in right of being a deceased
rector's daughter, rather represented the selectest circle of the
little town) advocated, whether celibacy, marriage, bigamy, or
polygamy.

So the remainder of the evening passed over without any further
reference to the secret Mrs. Goodenough was burning to disclose,
unless a remark made _łpropos de rien_ by Miss Browning, during the
silence of a deal, could be supposed to have connection with the
previous conversation. She said suddenly and abruptly,--

"I don't know what I have done that any man should make me his
slave." If she was referring to any prospect of matrimonial danger
she saw opening before her fancy, she might have been comforted. But
it was a remark of which no one took any notice, all being far too
much engaged in the rubber. Only when Miss Browning took her early
leave (for Miss Phoebe had a cold, and was an invalid at home),
Mrs. Goodenough burst out with--

"Well! now I may speak out my mind, and say as how if there was a
slave between us two, when Goodenough was alive, it wasn't me; and
I don't think as it was pretty in Miss Browning to give herself such
airs on her virginity when there was four widows in the room,--who've
had six honest men among 'em for husbands. No offence, Miss Airy!"
addressing an unfortunate little spinster, who found herself the sole
representative of celibacy now that Miss Browning was gone. "I could
tell her of a girl as she's very fond on, who's on the high road to
matrimony; and in as cunning a way as ever I heerd on; going out at
dusk to meet her sweetheart, just as if she was my Sally, or your
Jenny. And her name is Molly too,--which, as I have often thought,
shows a low taste in them as first called her so;--she might as
well be a scullery-maid at oncest. Not that she's picked up anybody
common; she's looked about her for a handsome fellow, and a smart
young man enough!"

Every one around the table looked curious and intent on the
disclosures being made, except the hostess, Mrs. Dawes, who smiled
intelligence with her eyes, and knowingly pursed up her mouth until
Mrs. Goodenough had finished her tale. Then she said demurely,--

"I suppose you mean Mr. Preston and Miss Gibson?"

"Why, who told you?" said Mrs. Goodenough, turning round upon her
in surprise. "You can't say as I did. There's many a Molly in
Hollingford, besides her,--though none, perhaps, in such a genteel
station in life. I never named her, I'm sure."

"No. But I know. I could tell my tale too," continued Mrs. Dawes.

"No! could you, really?" said Mrs. Goodenough, very curious and a
little jealous.

"Yes. My uncle Sheepshanks came upon them in the Park Avenue,--he
startled 'em a good deal, he said; and when he taxed Mr. Preston with
being with his sweetheart, he didn't deny it."

"Well! Now so much has come out, I'll tell you what I know. Only,
ladies, I wouldn't wish to do the girl an unkind turn,--so you must
keep what I've got to tell you a secret." Of course they promised;
that was easy.

"My Hannah, as married Tom Oakes, and lives in Pearson's Lane,
was a-gathering of damsons only a week ago, and Molly Gibson was
a-walking fast down the lane,--quite in a hurry like to meet some
one,--and Hannah's little Anna-Maria fell down, and Molly (who's a
kind-hearted lass enough) picked her up; so if Hannah had had her
doubts before, she had none then."

"But there was no one with her, was there?" asked one of the ladies,
anxiously, as Mrs. Goodenough stopped to finish her piece of cake,
just at this crisis.

"No: I said she looked as if she was going to meet some one,--and
by-and-by comes Mr. Preston running out of the wood just beyond
Hannah's, and says he, 'A cup of water, please, good woman, for a
lady has fainted, or is 'sterical or something.' Now though he didn't
know Hannah, Hannah knew him. 'More folks know Tom Fool, than Tom
Fool knows,' asking Mr. Preston's pardon; for he's no fool whatever
he be. And I could tell you more,--and what I've seed with my
own eyes. I seed her give him a letter in Grinstead's shop, only
yesterday, and he looked as black as thunder at her, for he seed me
if she didn't."

"It's a very suitable kind of thing," said Miss Airy; "why do they
make such a mystery of it?"

"Some folks like it," said Mrs. Dawes; "it adds zest to it all, to do
their courting underhand."

"Ay, it's like salt to their victual," put in Mrs. Goodenough. "But I
didn't think Molly Gibson was one of that sort, I didn't."

"The Gibsons hold themselves very high?" cried Mrs. Dawes, more as an
inquiry than an assertion. "Mrs. Gibson has called upon me."

"Ay, you're like to be a patient of the doctor's," put in Mrs.
Goodenough.

"She seemed to me very affable, though she is so intimate with the
Countess and the family at the Towers; and is quite the lady herself;
dines late, I've heard, and everything in style."

"Style! very different style to what Bob Gibson, her husband, was
used to when first he came here,--glad of a mutton-chop in his
surgery, for I doubt if he'd a fire anywhere else; we called him Bob
Gibson then, but none on us dare Bob him now; I'd as soon think o'
calling him sweep!"

"I think it looks very bad for Miss Gibson!" said one lady, rather
anxious to bring back the conversation to the more interesting
present time. But as soon as Mrs. Goodenough heard this natural
comment on the disclosures she had made, she fired round on the
speaker:--

"Not at all bad, and I'll trouble you not to use such a word as that
about Molly Gibson, as I've known all her life. It's odd if you will.
I was odd myself as a girl; I never could abide a plate of gathered
gooseberries, but I must needs go and skulk behind a bush and gather
'em for myself. It's some folk's taste, though it mayn't be Miss
Browning's, who'd have all the courting done under the nose of the
family. All as ever I said was that I was surprised at it in Molly
Gibson; and that I'd ha' thought it was liker that pretty piece of a
Cynthia as they call her; indeed, at one time I was ready to swear
as it was her Mr. Preston was after. And now, ladies, I'll wish you
a very good night. I cannot abide waste; and I'll venture for it
Sally's letting the candle in the lantern run all to grease, instead
of putting it out, as I've told her to do, if ever she's got to wait
for me."

So with formal dipping curtseys the ladies separated, but not without
thanking Mrs. Dawes for the pleasant evening they had had; a piece of
old-fashioned courtesy always gone through in those days.




CHAPTER XLVII.

SCANDAL AND ITS VICTIMS.


When Mr. Gibson returned to Hollingford, he found an accumulation of
business waiting for him, and he was much inclined to complain of the
consequences of the two days' comparative holiday, which had resulted
in over-work for the week to come. He had hardly time to speak to
his family, he had so immediately to rush off to pressing cases of
illness. But Molly managed to arrest him in the hall, standing there
with his great coat held out ready for him to put on, but whispering
as she did so--

"Papa! Mr. Osborne Hamley was here to see you yesterday. He looks
very ill, and he's evidently frightened about himself."

Mr. Gibson faced about, and looked at her for a moment; but all he
said was--

"I'll go and see him; don't tell your mother where I'm gone: you've
not mentioned this to her, I hope?"

"No," said Molly, for she had only told Mrs. Gibson of Osborne's
call, not of the occasion for it.

"Don't say anything about it; there's no need. Now I think of it, I
can't possibly go to-day,--but I will go."

Something in her father's manner disheartened Molly, who had
persuaded herself that Osborne's evident illness was partly
"nervous," by which she meant imaginary. She had dwelt upon his looks
of enjoyment at Miss Phoebe's perplexity, and thought that no one
really believing himself to be in danger could have given the merry
glances which he had done; but after seeing the seriousness of her
father's face, she recurred to the shock she had experienced on first
seeing Osborne's changed appearance. All this time Mrs. Gibson was
busy reading a letter from Cynthia which Mr. Gibson had brought from
London; for every opportunity of private conveyance was seized upon
when postage was so high; and Cynthia had forgotten so many things in
her hurried packing, that she now sent a list of the clothes which
she required. Molly almost wondered that it had not come to her;
but she did not understand the sort of reserve that was springing
up in Cynthia's mind towards her. Cynthia herself struggled with
the feeling, and tried to fight against it by calling herself
"ungrateful;" but the truth was, she believed that she no longer held
her former high place in Molly's estimation and she could not help
turning away from one who knew things to her discredit. She was fully
aware of Molly's prompt decision and willing action, where action
was especially disagreeable, on her behalf; she knew that Molly
would never bring up the past errors and difficulties; but still the
consciousness that the good, straightforward girl had learnt that
Cynthia had been guilty of so much underhand work cooled her regard,
and restrained her willingness of intercourse. Reproach herself with
ingratitude as she would, she could not help feeling glad to be
away from Molly; it was awkward to speak to her as if nothing had
happened; it was awkward to write to her about forgotten ribbons
and laces, when their last conversation had been on such different
subjects, and had called out such vehement expressions of feeling.
So Mrs. Gibson held the list in her hand, and read out the small
fragments of news that were intermixed with notices of Cynthia's
requirements.

"Helen cannot be so very ill," said Molly at length, "or Cynthia
would not want her pink muslin and daisy wreath."

"I don't see that that follows, I'm sure," replied Mrs. Gibson rather
sharply. "Helen would never be so selfish as to tie Cynthia to her
side, however ill she was. Indeed, I should not have felt that it
was my duty to let Cynthia go to London at all, if I had thought
she was to be perpetually exposed to the depressing atmosphere of
a sick-room. Besides, it must be so good for Helen to have Cynthia
coming in with bright pleasant accounts of the parties she has been
to--even if Cynthia disliked gaiety I should desire her to sacrifice
herself and go out as much as she could, for Helen's sake. My idea
of nursing is that one should not be always thinking of one's own
feelings and wishes, but doing those things which will most serve to
beguile the weary hours of an invalid. But then so few people have
had to consider the subject so deeply as I have done!"

Mrs. Gibson here thought fit to sigh before going on with Cynthia's
letter. As far as Molly could make any sense out of this rather
incoherent epistle, very incoherently read aloud to her, Cynthia was
really pleased, and glad to be of use and comfort to Helen, but at
the same time very ready to be easily persuaded into the perpetual
small gaieties which abounded in her uncle's house in London, even at
this dead season of the year. Mrs. Gibson came upon Mr. Henderson's
name once, and then went on with a running "um-um-um" to herself,
which sounded very mysterious, but which might as well have been
omitted, as all that Cynthia really said about him was, "Mr.
Henderson's mother has advised my aunt to consult a certain Dr.
Donaldson, who is said to be very clever in such cases as Helen's,
but my uncle is not sufficiently sure of the professional etiquette,
&c." Then there came a very affectionate, carefully worded message to
Molly,--implying a good deal more than was said of loving gratitude
for the trouble she had taken on Cynthia's behalf. And that was all;
and Molly went away a little depressed; she knew not why.

The operation on Lady Cumnor had been successfully performed, and in
a few days they hoped to bring her down to the Towers to recruit her
strength in the fresh country air. The case was one which interested
Mr. Gibson extremely, and in which his opinion had been proved to
be right, in opposition to that of one or two great names in London.
The consequence was that he was frequently consulted and referred to
during the progress of her recovery; and, as he had much to do in the
immediate circle of his Hollingford practice, as well as to write
thoughtful letters to his medical brethren in London, he found it
difficult to spare the three or four hours necessary to go over to
Hamley to see Osborne. He wrote to him, however, begging him to reply
immediately and detail his symptoms; and from the answer he received
he did not imagine that the case was immediately pressing. Osborne,
too, deprecated his coming over to Hamley for the express purpose
of seeing him. So the visit was deferred to that "more convenient
season" which is so often too late.

All these days the buzzing gossip about Molly's meetings with Mr.
Preston, her clandestine correspondence, the secret interviews in
lonely places, had been gathering strength, and assuming the positive
form of scandal. The simple innocent girl, who walked through the
quiet streets without a thought of being the object of mysterious
implications, became for a time the unconscious black sheep of the
town. Servants heard part of what was said in their mistresses'
drawing-rooms, and exaggerated the sayings amongst themselves with
the coarse strengthening of expression common with uneducated people.
Mr. Preston himself became aware that her name was being coupled with
his, though hardly to the extent to which the love of excitement and
gossip had carried people's speeches; he chuckled over the mistake,
but took no pains to correct it. "It serves her right," said he to
himself, "for meddling with other folk's business," and he felt
himself avenged for the discomfiture which her menace of appealing to
Lady Harriet had caused him, and the mortification he had experienced
in learning from her plain-speaking lips, how he had been talked
over by Cynthia and herself, with personal dislike on the one side,
and evident contempt on the other. Besides, if any denial of Mr.
Preston's stirred up an examination as to the real truth, more might
come out of his baffled endeavours to compel Cynthia to keep to her
engagement to him than he cared to have known. He was angry with
himself for still loving Cynthia; loving her in his own fashion, be
it understood. He told himself that many a woman of more position and
wealth would be glad enough to have him; some of them pretty women
too. And he asked himself why he was such a confounded fool as to go
on hankering after a penniless girl, who was as fickle as the wind?
The answer was silly enough, logically; but forcible in fact. Cynthia
was Cynthia, and not Venus herself could have been her substitute.
In this one thing Mr. Preston was more really true than many worthy
men; who, seeking to be married, turn with careless facility from the
unattainable to the attainable, and keep their feelings and fancy
tolerably loose till they find a woman who consents to be their wife.
But no one would ever be to Mr. Preston what Cynthia had been, and
was; and yet he could have stabbed her in certain of his moods. So,
Molly, who had come between him and the object of his desire, was not
likely to find favour in his sight, or to obtain friendly actions
from him.

There came a time--not very distant from the evening at Mrs.
Dawes'--when Molly felt that people looked askance at her. Mrs.
Goodenough openly pulled her grand-daughter away, when the young girl
stopped to speak to Molly in the street, and an engagement which
the two had made for a long walk together was cut very short by a
very trumpery excuse. Mrs. Goodenough explained her conduct in the
following manner to some of her friends:--

"You see, I don't think the worse of a girl for meeting her
sweetheart here and there and everywhere, till she gets talked about;
but then when she does--and Molly Gibson's name is in everybody's
mouth--I think it's only fair to Bessy, who has trusted me with
Annabella--not to let her daughter be seen with a lass who has
managed her matters so badly as to set folk talking about her. My
maxim is this,--and it's a very good working one, you may depend
on't--women should mind what they're about, and never be talked of;
and if a woman's talked of, the less her friends have to do with her
till the talk has died away, the better. So Annabella is not to have
anything to do with Molly Gibson, this visit at any rate."

For a good while the Miss Brownings were kept in ignorance of the
evil tongues that whispered hard words about Molly. Miss Browning
was known to "have a temper," and by instinct every one who came in
contact with her shrank from irritating that temper by uttering the
slightest syllable against the smallest of those creatures over whom
she spread the żgis of her love. She would and did reproach them
herself; she used to boast that she never spared them: but no one
else might touch them with the slightest slur of a passing word. But
Miss Phoebe inspired no such terror; the great reason why she did
not hear of the gossip against Molly as early as any one, was that,
although she was not the rose, she lived near the rose. Besides, she
was of so tender a nature that even thick-skinned Mrs. Goodenough was
unwilling to say what would give Miss Phoebe pain; and it was the
new-comer Mrs. Dawes, who in all ignorance alluded to the town's
talk, as to something of which Miss Phoebe must be aware. Then Miss
Phoebe poured down her questions, although she protested, even with
tears, her total disbelief in all the answers she received. It was
a small act of heroism on her part to keep all that she then learnt
a secret from her sister Dorothy, as she did for four or five days;
till Miss Browning attacked her one evening with the following
speech:--

"Phoebe! either you've some reason for puffing yourself out with
sighs, or you've not. If you have a reason, it's your duty to tell it
me directly; and if you haven't a reason, you must break yourself of
a bad habit that is growing upon you."

"Oh, sister! do you think it is really my duty to tell you? it would
be such a comfort; but then I thought I ought not; it will distress
you so."

"Nonsense. I am so well prepared for misfortune by the frequent
contemplation of its possibility that I believe I can receive any ill
news with apparent equanimity and real resignation. Besides, when you
said yesterday at breakfast-time that you meant to give up the day
to making your drawers tidy, I was aware that some misfortune was
impending, though of course I could not judge of its magnitude. Is
the Highchester Bank broken?"

"Oh no, sister!" said Miss Phoebe, moving to a seat close to her
sister's on the sofa. "Have you really been thinking that! I wish I
had told you what I heard at the very first, if you've been fancying
that!"

"Take warning, Phoebe, and learn to have no concealments from me. I
did think we must be ruined, from your ways of going on: eating no
meat at dinner, and sighing continually. And now what is it?"

"I hardly know how to tell you, Dorothy. I really don't."

Miss Phoebe began to cry; Miss Browning took hold of her arm, and
gave her a little sharp shake.

"Cry as much as you like when you've told me; but don't cry now,
child, when you're keeping me on the tenter-hooks."

"Molly Gibson has lost her character, sister. That's it."

"Molly Gibson has done no such thing!" said Miss Browning
indignantly. "How dare you repeat such stories about poor Mary's
child? Never let me hear you say such things again."

"I can't help it. Mrs. Dawes told me; and she says it's all over the
town. I told her I did not believe a word of it. And I kept it from
you; and I think I should have been really ill if I'd kept it to
myself any longer. Oh, sister! what are you going to do?"

For Miss Browning had risen without speaking a word, and was leaving
the room in a stately and determined fashion.

"I'm going to put on my bonnet and things, and then I shall call upon
Mrs. Dawes, and confront her with her lies."

"Oh, don't call them lies, sister; it's such a strong, ugly word.
Please call them tallydiddles, for I don't believe she meant any
harm. Besides--besides--if they should turn out to be truth? Really,
sister, that's the weight on my mind; so many things sounded as if
they might be true."

"What things?" said Miss Browning, still standing with judicial
erectness of position in the middle of the floor.

"Why--one story was that Molly had given him a letter."

"Who's him? How am I to understand a story told in that silly way?"
Miss Browning sat down on the nearest chair, and made up her mind to
be patient if she could.

"Him is Mr. Preston. And that must be true; because I missed her
from my side when I wanted to ask her if she thought blue would look
green by candlelight, as the young man said it would, and she had run
across the street, and Mrs. Goodenough was just going into the shop,
just as she said she was."

Miss Browning's distress was overcoming her anger; so she only said,
"Phoebe, I think you'll drive me mad. Do tell me what you heard
from Mrs. Dawes in a sensible and coherent manner, for once in your
life."

"I'm sure I'm trying with all my might to tell you everything just as
it happened."

"What did you hear from Mrs. Dawes?"

"Why, that Molly and Mr. Preston were keeping company just as if she
was a maid-servant and he was a gardener: meeting at all sorts of
improper times and places, and fainting away in his arms, and out at
night together, and writing to each other, and slipping their letters
into each other's hands; and that was what I was talking about,
sister, for I next door to saw that done once. I saw her with my own
eyes run across the street to Grinstead's, where he was, for we had
just left him there; with a letter in her hand, too, which was not
there when she came back all fluttered and blushing. But I never
thought anything of it at the time; but now all the town is talking
about it, and crying shame, and saying they ought to be married."
Miss Phoebe sank into sobbing again; but was suddenly roused by a
good box on her ear. Miss Browning was standing over her almost
trembling with passion.

"Phoebe, if ever I hear you say such things again, I'll turn you
out of the house that minute."

"I only said what Mrs. Dawes said, and you asked me what it was,"
replied Miss Phoebe, humbly and meekly. "Dorothy, you should not
have done that."

"Never mind whether I should or I shouldn't. That's not the matter
in hand. What I've got to decide is, how to put a stop to all these
lies."

"But, Dorothy, they are not all lies--if you will call them so; I'm
afraid some things are true; though I stuck to their being false when
Mrs. Dawes told me of them."

"If I go to Mrs. Dawes, and she repeats them to me, I shall slap her
face or box her ears I'm afraid, for I couldn't stand tales being
told of poor Mary's daughter, as if they were just a stirring piece
of news like James Horrocks' pig with two heads," said Miss Browning,
meditating aloud. "That would do harm instead of good. Phoebe, I'm
really sorry I boxed your ears, only I should do it again if you said
the same things." Phoebe sate down by her sister, and took hold of
one of her withered hands, and began caressing it, which was her way
of accepting her sister's expression of regret. "If I speak to Molly,
the child will deny it, if she's half as good-for-nothing as they
say; and if she's not, she'll only worry herself to death. No, that
won't do. Mrs. Goodenough--but she's a donkey; and if I convinced
her, she could never convince any one else. No; Mrs. Dawes, who told
you, shall tell me, and I'll tie my hands together inside my muff,
and bind myself over to keep the peace. And when I've heard what is
to be heard, I'll put the matter into Mr. Gibson's hands. That's what
I'll do. So it's no use your saying anything against it, Phoebe,
for I shan't attend to you."

Miss Browning went to Mrs. Dawes' and began civilly enough to make
inquiries concerning the reports current in Hollingford about Molly
and Mr. Preston; and Mrs. Dawes fell into the snare, and told all the
real and fictitious circumstances of the story in circulation, quite
unaware of the storm that was gathering and ready to fall upon her
as soon as she stopped speaking. But she had not the long habit of
reverence for Miss Browning which would have kept so many Hollingford
ladies from justifying themselves if she found fault. Mrs. Dawes
stood up for herself and her own veracity, bringing out fresh
scandal, which she said she did not believe, but that many did; and
adducing so much evidence as to the truth of what she had said and
did believe, that Miss Browning was almost quelled, and sate silent
and miserable at the end of Mrs. Dawes' justification of herself.

"Well!" she said at length, rising up from her chair as she spoke,
"I'm very sorry I've lived till this day; it's a blow to me just as
if I had heard of such goings-on in my own flesh and blood. I suppose
I ought to apologize to you, Mrs. Dawes, for what I said; but I've
no heart to do it to-day. I ought not to have spoken as I did; but
that's nothing to this affair, you see."

"I hope you do me the justice to perceive that I only repeated what
I had heard on good authority, Miss Browning," said Mrs. Dawes in
reply.

"My dear, don't repeat evil on any authority unless you can do some
good by speaking about it," said Miss Browning, laying her hand on
Mrs. Dawes' shoulder. "I'm not a good woman, but I know what is good,
and that advice is. And now I think I can tell you that I beg your
pardon for flying out upon you so; but God knows what pain you were
putting me to. You'll forgive me, won't you, my dear?" Mrs. Dawes
felt the hand trembling on her shoulder, and saw the real distress of
Miss Browning's mind, so it was not difficult for her to grant the
requested forgiveness. Then Miss Browning went home, and said but a
few words to Phoebe, who indeed saw well enough that her sister had
heard the reports confirmed, and needed no further explanation of
the cause of scarcely-tasted dinner, and short replies, and saddened
looks. Presently Miss Browning sate down and wrote a short note. Then
she rang the bell, and told the little maiden who answered it to
take it to Mr. Gibson, and if he was out to see that it was given
to him as soon as ever he came home. And then she went and put on
her Sunday cap; and Miss Phoebe knew that her sister had written
to ask Mr. Gibson to come and be told of the rumours affecting his
daughter. Miss Browning was sadly disturbed at the information she
had received, and the task that lay before her; she was miserably
uncomfortable to herself and irritable to Miss Phoebe, and the
netting-cotton she was using kept continually snapping and breaking
from the jerks of her nervous hands. When the knock at the door was
heard,--the well-known doctor's knock,--Miss Browning took off her
spectacles, and dropped them on the carpet, breaking them as she
did so; and then she bade Miss Phoebe leave the room, as if her
presence had cast the evil-eye, and caused the misfortune. She wanted
to look natural, and was distressed at forgetting whether she usually
received him sitting or standing.

"Well!" said he, coming in cheerfully, and rubbing his cold hands as
he went straight to the fire, "and what is the matter with us? It's
Phoebe, I suppose? I hope none of those old spasms? But, after all,
a dose or two will set that to rights."

"Oh! Mr. Gibson, I wish it was Phoebe, or me either!" said Miss
Browning, trembling more and more.

He sate down by her patiently, when he saw her agitation, and took
her hand in a kind, friendly manner.

"Don't hurry yourself,--take your time. I daresay it's not so bad as
you fancy; but we'll see about it. There's a great deal of help in
the world, much as we abuse it."

"Mr. Gibson," said she, "it's your Molly I'm so grieved about. It's
out now, and God help us both, and the poor child too, for I'm sure
she's been led astray, and not gone wrong by her own free will!"

"Molly!" said he, fighting against her words. "What's my little Molly
been doing or saying?"

"Oh! Mr. Gibson, I don't know how to tell you. I never would have
named it, if I had not been convinced, sorely, sorely against my
will."

"At any rate, you can let me hear what you've heard," said he,
putting his elbow on the table, and screening his eyes with his hand.
"Not that I'm a bit afraid of anything you can hear about my girl,"
continued he. "Only in this little nest of gossip, it's as well to
know what people are talking about."

"They say--oh! how shall I tell you?"

"Go on, can't you?" said he, removing his hand from his blazing eyes.
"I'm not going to believe it, so don't be afraid!"

"But I fear you must believe it. I would not if I could help it.
She's been carrying on a clandestine correspondence with Mr.
Preston!--"

"Mr. Preston!" exclaimed he.

"And meeting him at all sorts of unseemly places and hours, out of
doors,--in the dark,--fainting away in his--his arms, if I must speak
out. All the town is talking of it." Mr. Gibson's hand was over his
eyes again, and he made no sign; so Miss Browning went on, adding
touch to touch. "Mr. Sheepshanks saw them together. They have
exchanged notes in Grinstead's shop; she ran after him there."

"Be quiet, can't you?" said Mr. Gibson, taking his hand away, and
showing his grim set face. "I've heard enough. Don't go on. I said
I shouldn't believe it, and I don't. I suppose I must thank you for
telling me; but I can't yet."

"I don't want your thanks," said Miss Browning, almost crying. "I
thought you ought to know; for though you're married again, I can't
forget you were dear Mary's husband once upon a time; and Molly's her
child."

"I'd rather not speak any more about it just at present," said he,
not at all replying to Miss Browning's last speech. "I may not
control myself as I ought. I only wish I could meet Preston, and
horsewhip him within an inch of his life. I wish I'd the doctoring
of these slanderous gossips. I'd make their tongues lie still for a
while. My little girl! What harm has she done them all, that they
should go and foul her fair name?"

"Indeed, Mr. Gibson, I'm afraid it's all true. I would not have sent
for you if I hadn't examined into it. Do ascertain the truth before
you do anything violent, such as horsewhipping or poisoning."

With all the _inconsÄquence_ of a man in a passion, Mr. Gibson
laughed out, "What have I said about horsewhipping or poisoning?
Do you think I'd have Molly's name dragged about the streets in
connection with any act of violence on my part? Let the report die
away as it arose. Time will prove its falsehood."

"But I don't think it will, and that's the pity of it," said Miss
Browning. "You must do something, but I don't know what."

"I shall go home and ask Molly herself what's the meaning of it all;
that's all I shall do. It's too ridiculous--knowing Molly as I do,
it's perfectly ridiculous." He got up and walked about the room
with hasty steps, laughing short unnatural laughs from time to time.
"Really what will they say next? 'Satan finds some mischief still for
idle tongues to do.'"

"Don't talk of Satan, please, in this house. No one knows what may
happen, if he's lightly spoken about," pleaded Miss Browning.

He went on, without noticing her, talking to himself,--"I've a great
mind to leave the place;--and what food for scandal that piece
of folly would give rise to!" Then he was silent for a time; his
hands in his pockets, his eyes on the ground, as he continued his
quarter-deck march. Suddenly he stopped close to Miss Browning's
chair: "I'm thoroughly ungrateful to you, for as true a mark of
friendship as you've ever shown to me. True or false, it was right
I should know the wretched scandal that was being circulated; and it
couldn't have been pleasant for you to tell it me. Thank you from the
bottom of my heart."

"Indeed, Mr. Gibson, if it was false I would never have named it, but
let it die away."

"It's not true, though!" said he, doggedly, letting drop the hand he
had taken in his effusion of gratitude.

She shook her head. "I shall always love Molly for her mother's
sake," she said. And it was a great concession from the correct Miss
Browning. But her father did not understand it as such.

"You ought to love her for her own. She has done nothing to disgrace
herself. I shall go straight home, and probe into the truth."

"As if the poor girl who has been led away into deceit already would
scruple much at going on in falsehood," was Miss Browning's remark on
this last speech of Mr. Gibson's; but she had discretion enough not
to make it until he was well out of hearing.




CHAPTER XLVIII.

AN INNOCENT CULPRIT.


With his head bent down--as if he were facing some keen-blowing
wind--and yet there was not a breath of air stirring--Mr. Gibson
went swiftly to his own home. He rang at the door-bell; an unusual
proceeding on his part. Maria opened the door. "Go and tell Miss
Molly she's wanted in the dining-room. Don't say who it is that wants
her." There was something in Mr. Gibson's manner that made Maria obey
him to the letter, in spite of Molly's surprised question,--

"Wants me? Who is it, Maria?"

Mr. Gibson went into the dining-room, and shut the door, for an
instant's solitude. He went up to the chimney-piece, took hold of it,
and laid his head on his hands, and tried to still the beating of his
heart.

The door opened. He knew that Molly stood there before he heard her
tone of astonishment.

"Papa!"

"Hush!" said he, turning round sharply. "Shut the door. Come here."

She came to him, wondering what was amiss. Her thoughts went to the
Hamleys immediately. "Is it Osborne?" she asked, breathless. If Mr.
Gibson had not been too much agitated to judge calmly, he might have
deduced comfort from these three words.

But instead of allowing himself to seek for comfort from collateral
evidence, he said,--"Molly, what is this I hear? That you have been
keeping up a clandestine intercourse with Mr. Preston--meeting him
in out-of-the-way places; exchanging letters with him in a stealthy
way?"

Though he had professed to disbelieve all this, and did disbelieve it
at the bottom of his soul, his voice was hard and stern, his face was
white and grim, and his eyes fixed Molly's with the terrible keenness
of their research. Molly trembled all over, but she did not attempt
to evade his penetration. If she was silent for a moment, it was
because she was rapidly reviewing her relation with regard to Cynthia
in the matter. It was but a moment's pause of silence; but it seemed
long minutes to one who was craving for a burst of indignant denial.
He had taken hold of her two arms just above her wrists, as she had
advanced towards him; he was unconscious of this action; but, as his
impatience for her words grew upon him, he grasped her more and more
tightly in his vice-like hands, till she made a little involuntary
sound of pain. And then he let go; and she looked at her soft bruised
flesh, with tears gathering fast to her eyes to think that he, her
father, should have hurt her so. At the instant it appeared to her
stranger that he should inflict bodily pain upon his child, than that
he should have heard the truth--even in an exaggerated form. With a
childish gesture she held out her arm to him; but if she expected
pity, she received none.

"Pooh!" said he, as he just glanced at the mark, "that is
nothing--nothing. Answer my question. Have you--have you met that man
in private?"

"Yes, papa, I have; but I don't think it was wrong."

He sate down now. "Wrong!" he echoed, bitterly. "Not wrong? Well! I
must bear it somehow. Your mother is dead. That's one comfort. It is
true, then, is it? Why, I didn't believe it--not I. I laughed in my
sleeve at their credulity; and I was the dupe all the time!"

"Papa, I cannot tell you all. It is not my secret, or you should
know it directly. Indeed, you will be sorry some time--I have never
deceived you yet, have I?" trying to take one of his hands; but he
kept them tightly in his pockets, his eyes fixed on the pattern of
the carpet before him. "Papa!" said she, pleading again, "have I ever
deceived you?"

"How can I tell? I hear of this from the town's talk. I don't know
what next may come out!"

"The town's talk!" said Molly in dismay. "What business is it of
theirs?"

"Every one makes it their business to cast dirt on a girl's name who
has disregarded the commonest rules of modesty and propriety."

"Papa, you are very hard. Modesty disregarded! I will tell you
exactly what I have done. I met Mr. Preston once,--that evening
when you put me down to walk over Croston Heath,--and there was
another person with him. I met him a second time--and that time by
appointment--nobody but our two selves,--in the Towers' Park. That is
all, papa. You must trust me. I cannot explain more. You must trust
me indeed."

He could not help relenting at her words; there was such truth in the
tone in which they were spoken. But he neither spoke nor stirred for
a minute or two. Then he raised his eyes to hers for the first time
since she had acknowledged the external truth of what he charged her
with. Her face was very white, but it bore the impress of the final
sincerity of death, when the true expression prevails without the
poor disguises of time.

"The letters?" he said,--but almost as if he were ashamed to question
that countenance any further.

"I gave him one letter,--of which I did not write a word,--which, in
fact, I believe to have been merely an envelope, without any writing
whatever inside. The giving that letter,--the two interviews I have
named,--make all the private intercourse I have had with Mr. Preston.
Oh! papa, what have they been saying that has grieved--shocked you so
much?"

"Never mind. As the world goes, what you say you have done, Molly, is
ground enough. You must tell me all. I must be able to refute these
rumours point by point."

"How are they to be refuted, when you say that the truth which I have
acknowledged is ground enough for what people are saying?"

"You say you were not acting for yourself, but for another. If you
tell me who the other was,--if you tell me everything out fully,
I will do my utmost to screen her--for of course I guess it was
Cynthia--while I am exonerating you."

"No, papa!" said Molly, after some little consideration; "I have told
you all I can tell; all that concerns myself; and I have promised not
to say one word more."

"Then your character will be impugned. It must be, unless the fullest
explanation of these secret meetings is given. I've a great mind to
force the whole truth out of Preston himself!"

"Papa! once again I beg you to trust me. If you ask Mr. Preston you
will very likely hear the whole truth; but that is just what I have
been trying so hard to conceal, for it will only make several people
very unhappy if it is known, and the whole affair is over and done
with now."

"Not your share in it. Miss Browning sent for me this evening to
tell me how people were talking about you. She implied that it was a
complete loss of your good name. You don't know, Molly, how slight
a thing may blacken a girl's reputation for life. I'd hard work to
stand all she said, even though I didn't believe a word of it at the
time. And now you've told me that much of it is true."

"But I think you are a brave man, papa. And you believe me, don't
you? We shall outlive these rumours, never fear."

"You don't know the power of ill-natured tongues, child," said he.

"Oh, now you've called me 'child' again I don't care for anything.
Dear, dear papa, I'm sure it is best and wisest to take no notice of
these speeches. After all, they may not mean them ill-naturedly. I am
sure Miss Browning would not. By-and-by they'll quite forget how much
they made out of so little,--and even if they don't, you would not
have me break my solemn word, would you?"

"Perhaps not. But I cannot easily forgive the person who, by
practising on your generosity, led you into this scrape. You are very
young, and look upon these things as merely temporary evils. I have
more experience."

"Still, I don't see what I can do now, papa. Perhaps I've been
foolish; but what I did, I did of my own self. It was not suggested
to me. And I'm sure it was not wrong in morals, whatever it might
be in judgment. As I said, it's all over now; what I did ended the
affair, I am thankful to say; and it was with that object I did it.
If people choose to talk about me, I must submit; and so must you,
dear papa."

"Does your mother--does Mrs. Gibson--know anything about it?" asked
he with sudden anxiety.

"No; not a bit; not a word. Pray don't name it to her. That might
lead to more mischief than anything else. I have really told you
everything I am at liberty to tell."

It was a great relief to Mr. Gibson to find that his sudden fear that
his wife might have been privy to it all was ill-founded. He had been
seized by a sudden dread that she, whom he had chosen to marry in
order to have a protectress and guide for his daughter, had been
cognizant of this ill-advised adventure with Mr. Preston; nay, more,
that she might even have instigated it to save her own child; for
that Cynthia was, somehow or other, at the bottom of it all he had
no doubt whatever. But now, at any rate, Mrs. Gibson had not been
playing a treacherous part; that was all the comfort he could extract
out of Molly's mysterious admission, that much mischief might result
from Mrs. Gibson's knowing anything about these meetings with Mr.
Preston.

"Then, what is to be done?" said he. "These reports are abroad,--am
I to do nothing to contradict them? Am I to go about smiling and
content with all this talk about you, passing from one idle gossip to
another?"

"I'm afraid so. I'm very sorry, for I never meant you to have known
anything about it, and I can see now how it must distress you. But
surely when nothing more happens, and nothing comes of what has
happened, the wonder and the gossip must die away. I know you believe
every word I have said, and that you trust me, papa. Please, for my
sake, be patient with all this gossip and cackle."

"It will try me hard, Molly," said he.

"For my sake, papa!"

"I don't see what else I can do," replied he moodily, "unless I get
hold of Preston."

"That would be the worst of all. That would make a talk. And, after
all, perhaps he was not so very much to blame. Yes! he was. But
he behaved well to me as far as that goes," said she, suddenly
recollecting his speech when Mr. Sheepshanks came up in the Towers'
Park--"Don't stir, you have done nothing to be ashamed of."

"That's true. A quarrel between men which drags a woman's name into
notice is to be avoided at any cost. But sooner or later I must have
it out with Preston. He shall find it not so pleasant to have placed
my daughter in equivocal circumstances."

"He didn't place me. He didn't know I was coming, didn't expect to
meet me either time; and would far rather not have taken the letter I
gave him if he could have helped himself."

"It's all a mystery. I hate to have you mixed up in mysteries."

"I hate to be mixed up. But what can I do? I know of another mystery
which I'm pledged not to speak about. I cannot help myself."

"Well, all I can say is, never be the heroine of a mystery that you
can avoid, if you can't help being an accessory. Then, I suppose, I
must yield to your wishes and let this scandal wear itself out
without any notice from me?"

"What else can you do under the circumstances?"

"Ay; what else, indeed? How shall you bear it?"

For an instant the quick hot tears sprang into her eyes; to have
everybody--all her world, thinking evil of her, did seem hard to the
girl who had never thought or said an unkind thing of them. But she
smiled as she made answer,--

"It's like tooth-drawing, it will be over some time. It would be much
worse if I really had been doing wrong."

"Cynthia shall beware--" he began; but Molly put her hand before his
mouth.

"Papa, Cynthia must not be accused, or suspected; you will drive her
out of your house if you do, she is so proud, and so unprotected,
except by you. And Roger,--for Roger's sake, you will never do or say
anything to send Cynthia away, when he has trusted us all to take
care of her, and love her in his absence. Oh! I think if she were
really wicked, and I did not love her at all, I should feel bound to
watch over her, he loves her so dearly. And she is really good at
heart, and I do love her dearly. You must not vex or hurt Cynthia,
papa,--remember she is dependent upon you!"

"I think the world would get on tolerably well, if there were no
women in it. They plague the life out of one. You've made me forget,
amongst you--poor old Job Houghton that I ought to have gone to see
an hour ago."

Molly put up her mouth to be kissed. "You're not angry with me now,
papa, are you?"

"Get out of my way" (kissing her all the same). "If I'm not angry
with you, I ought to be; for you've caused a great deal of worry,
which won't be over yet awhile, I can tell you."

For all Molly's bravery at the time of this conversation, it was she
that suffered more than her father. He kept out of the way of hearing
gossip; but she was perpetually thrown into the small society of the
place. Mrs. Gibson herself had caught cold, and moreover was not
tempted by the quiet old-fashioned visiting which was going on just
about this time, provoked by the visit of two of Mrs. Dawes' pretty
unrefined nieces, who laughed, and chattered, and ate, and would fain
have flirted with Mr. Ashton, the vicar, could he have been brought
by any possibility to understand his share in the business. Mr.
Preston did not accept the invitations to Hollingford tea-drinkings
with the same eager gratitude as he had done a year before: or else
the shadow which hung over Molly would have extended to him, her
co-partner in the clandestine meetings which gave such umbrage to
the feminine virtue of the town. Molly herself was invited, because
it would not do to pass any apparent slight on either Mr. or Mrs.
Gibson; but there was a tacit and underhand protest against her being
received on the old terms. Every one was civil to her, but no one was
cordial; there was a very perceptible film of difference in their
behaviour to her from what it was formerly; nothing that had outlines
and could be defined. But Molly, for all her clear conscience and her
brave heart, felt acutely that she was only tolerated, not welcomed.
She caught the buzzing whispers of the two Miss Oakes's, who, when
they first met the heroine of the prevailing scandal, looked at her
askance, and criticised her pretensions to good looks, with hardly
an attempt at under-tones. Molly tried to be thankful that her
father was not in the mood for visiting. She was even glad that her
stepmother was too much of an invalid to come out, when she felt thus
slighted, and as it were, degraded from her place. Miss Browning
herself, that true old friend, spoke to her with chilling dignity,
and much reserve; for she had never heard a word from Mr. Gibson
since the evening when she had put herself to so much pain to tell
him of the disagreeable rumours affecting his daughter.

Only Miss Phoebe would seek out Molly with even more than her
former tenderness; and this tried Molly's calmness more than all
the slights put together. The soft hand, pressing hers under the
table,--the continual appeals to her, so as to bring her back into
the conversation, touched Molly almost to shedding tears. Sometimes
the poor girl wondered to herself whether this change in the
behaviour of her acquaintances was not a mere fancy of hers; whether,
if she had never had that conversation with her father, in which she
had borne herself so bravely at the time, she should have discovered
the difference in their treatment of her. She never told her father
how she felt these perpetual small slights: she had chosen to bear
the burden of her own free will; nay, more, she had insisted on
being allowed to do so; and it was not for her to grieve him now by
showing that she shrank from the consequences of her own act. So she
never even made an excuse for not going into the small gaieties, or
mingling with the society of Hollingford. Only she suddenly let go
the stretch of restraint she was living in, when one evening her
father told her that he was really anxious about Mrs. Gibson's cough,
and should like Molly to give up a party at Mrs. Goodenough's, to
which they were all three invited, but to which Molly alone was
going. Molly's heart leaped up at the thought of stopping at home,
even though the next moment she had to blame herself for rejoicing at
a reprieve that was purchased by another's suffering. However, the
remedies prescribed by her husband did Mrs. Gibson good; and she was
particularly grateful and caressing to Molly.

"Really, dear!" said she, stroking Molly's head, "I think your hair
is getting softer, and losing that disagreeable crisp curly feeling."

Then Molly knew that her stepmother was in high good-humour; the
smoothness or curliness of her hair was a sure test of the favour in
which Mrs. Gibson held her at the moment.

"I am so sorry to be the cause of detaining you from this little
party, but dear papa is so over-anxious about me. I have always been
a kind of pet with gentlemen, and poor Mr. Kirkpatrick never knew how
to make enough of me. But I think Mr. Gibson is even more foolishly
fond: his last words were, 'Take care of yourself, Hyacinth;' and
then he came back again to say, 'If you don't attend to my directions
I won't answer for the consequences.' I shook my forefinger at him,
and said, 'Don't be so anxious, you silly man.'"

"I hope we have done everything he told us to do," said Molly.

"Oh yes! I feel so much better. Do you know, late as it is, I think
you might go to Mrs. Goodenough's yet? Maria could take you, and I
should like to see you dressed; when one has been wearing dull warm
gowns for a week or two one gets quite a craving for bright colours,
and evening dress. So go and get ready, dear, and then perhaps you'll
bring me back some news, for really, shut up as I have been with only
papa and you for the last fortnight, I've got quite moped and dismal,
and I can't bear to keep young people from the gaieties suitable to
their age."

"Oh, pray, mamma! I had so much rather not go!"

"Very well! very well! Only I think it is rather selfish of you, when
you see I am so willing to make the sacrifice for your sake."

"But you say it is a sacrifice to you, and I don't want to go."

"Very well; did I not say you might stop at home? only pray don't
chop logic; nothing is so fatiguing to a sick person."

Then they were silent for some time. Mrs. Gibson broke the silence by
saying, in a languid voice--

"Can't you think of anything amusing to say, Molly?"

Molly pumped up from the depths of her mind a few little trivialities
which she had nearly forgotten, but she felt that they were anything
but amusing, and so Mrs. Gibson seemed to feel them; for presently
she said--

"I wish Cynthia was at home." And Molly felt it as a reproach to her
own dulness.

"Shall I write to her and ask her to come back?"

"Well, I'm not sure; I wish I knew a great many things. You've not
heard anything of poor dear Osborne Hamley lately, have you?"

Remembering her father's charge not to speak of Osborne's health,
Molly made no reply, nor was any needed, for Mrs. Gibson went on
thinking aloud--

"You see, if Mr. Henderson has been as attentive as he was in the
spring--and the chances about Roger--I shall be really grieved if
anything happens to that young man, uncouth as he is, but it must be
owned that Africa is not merely an unhealthy--it is a savage--and
even in some parts a cannibal country. I often think of all I've
read of it in geography books, as I lie awake at night, and if Mr.
Henderson is really becoming attached! The future is hidden from us
by infinite wisdom, Molly, or else I should like to know it; one
would calculate one's behaviour at the present time so much better if
one only knew what events were to come. But I think, on the whole, we
had better not alarm Cynthia. If we had only known in time we might
have planned for her to have come down with Lord Cumnor and my lady."

"Are they coming? Is Lady Cumnor well enough to travel?"

"Yes, to be sure; or else I should not have considered whether or no
Cynthia could have come down with them. It would have sounded very
well--more than respectable, and would have given her a position
among that lawyer set in London."

"Then Lady Cumnor is better?"

"To be sure. I should have thought papa would have mentioned it to
you; but, to be sure, he is always so scrupulously careful not to
speak about his patients. Quite right too--quite right and delicate.
Why, he hardly ever tells me how they are going on. Yes! the Earl and
the Countess, and Lady Harriet and Lord and Lady Cuxhaven, and Lady
Agnes; and I've ordered a new winter bonnet and a black satin cloak."




CHAPTER XLIX.

MOLLY GIBSON FINDS A CHAMPION.


Lady Cumnor had so far recovered from the violence of her attack, and
from the consequent operation, as to be able to be removed to the
Towers for change of air; and accordingly she was brought thither
by her whole family with all the pomp and state becoming an invalid
peeress. There was every probability that "the family" would make a
longer residence at the Towers than they had done for several years,
during which time they had been wanderers hither and thither in
search of health. Somehow, after all, it was very pleasant and
restful to come to the old ancestral home, and every member of the
family enjoyed it in his or her own way; Lord Cumnor most especially.
His talent for gossip and his love of small details had scarcely
fair play in the hurry of a London life, and were much nipped in the
bud during his Continental sojournings, as he neither spoke French
fluently, nor understood it easily when spoken. Besides, he was a
great proprietor, and liked to know how his land was going on; how
his tenants were faring in the world. He liked to hear of their
births, marriages, and deaths, and had something of a royal memory
for faces. In short, if ever a peer was an old woman, Lord Cumnor
was that peer; but he was a very good-natured old woman, and rode
about on his stout old cob with his pockets full of halfpence for
the children, and little packets of snuff for the old people. Like
an old woman, too, he enjoyed an afternoon cup of tea in his wife's
sitting-room, and over his gossip's beverage he would repeat all that
he had learnt in the day. Lady Cumnor was exactly in that state of
convalescence when such talk as her lord's was extremely agreeable
to her, but she had contemned the habit of listening to gossip so
severely all her life, that she thought it due to consistency to
listen first, and enter a supercilious protest afterwards. It had,
however, come to be a family habit for all of them to gather together
in Lady Cumnor's room on their return from their daily walks, or
drives, or rides, and over the fire, sipping their tea at her early
meal, to recount the morsels of local intelligence they had heard
during the morning. When they had said all that they had to say (and
not before), they had always to listen to a short homily from her
ladyship on the well-worn texts,--the poorness of conversation about
persons,--the probable falsehood of all they had heard, and the
degradation of character implied by its repetition. On one of these
November evenings they were all assembled in Lady Cumnor's room.
She was lying,--all draped in white, and covered up with an Indian
shawl,--on a sofa near the fire. Lady Harriet sate on the rug, close
before the wood-fire, picking up fallen embers with a pair of dwarf
tongs, and piling them on the red and odorous heap in the centre of
the hearth. Lady Cuxhaven, notable from girlhood, was using the blind
man's holiday to net fruit-nets for the walls at Cuxhaven Park. Lady
Cumnor's woman was trying to see to pour out tea by the light of one
small wax-candle in the background (for Lady Cumnor could not bear
much light to her weakened eyes); and the great leafless branches of
the trees outside the house kept sweeping against the windows, moved
by the wind that was gathering.

It was always Lady Cumnor's habit to snub those she loved best. Her
husband was perpetually snubbed by her, yet she missed him now that
he was later than usual, and professed not to want her tea; but they
all knew that it was only because he was not there to hand it to her,
and be found fault with for his invariable stupidity in forgetting
that she liked to put sugar in before she took any cream. At length
he burst in:--

"I beg your pardon, my lady,--I'm later than I should have been,
I know. Why! haven't you had your tea yet?" he exclaimed, bustling
about to get the cup for his wife.

"You know I never take cream before I've sweetened it," said she,
with even more emphasis on the "never" than usual.

"Oh, dear! What a simpleton I am! I think I might have remembered it
by this time. You see I met old Sheepshanks, and that's the reason of
it."

"Of your handing me the cream before the sugar?" asked his wife. It
was one of her grim jokes.

"No, no! ha, ha! You're better this evening, I think, my dear. But,
as I was saying, Sheepshanks is such an eternal talker, there's no
getting away from him, and I had no idea it was so late!"

"Well, I think the least you can do is to tell us something of Mr.
Sheepshanks' conversation now you have torn yourself away from him."

"Conversation! did I call it conversation? I don't think I said much.
I listened. He really has always a great deal to say. More than
Preston, for instance. And, by the way, he was telling me something
about Preston;--old Sheepshanks thinks he'll be married before
long,--he says there's a great deal of gossip going on about him
and Gibson's daughter. They've been caught meeting in the park, and
corresponding, and all that kind of thing that is likely to end in a
marriage."

"I shall be very sorry," said Lady Harriet. "I always liked that
girl; and I can't bear papa's model land-agent."

"I daresay it's not true," said Lady Cumnor, in a very audible aside
to Lady Harriet. "Papa picks up stories one day to contradict them
the next."

"Ah, but this did sound like truth. Sheepshanks said all the old
ladies in the town had got hold of it, and were making a great
scandal out of it."

"I don't think it does sound quite a nice story. I wonder what Clare
could be doing to allow such goings on," said Lady Cuxhaven.

"I think it is much more likely that Clare's own daughter--that
pretty pawky Miss Kirkpatrick--is the real heroine of this story,"
said Lady Harriet. "She always looks like a heroine of genteel
comedy; and those young ladies were capable of a good deal of
innocent intriguing, if I remember rightly. Now little Molly Gibson
has a certain _gaucherie_ about her which would disqualify her at
once from any clandestine proceedings. Besides, 'clandestine!' why,
the child is truth itself. Papa, are you sure Mr. Sheepshanks said it
was Miss Gibson that was exciting Hollingford scandal? Wasn't it Miss
Kirkpatrick? The notion of her and Mr. Preston making a match of it
doesn't sound so incongruous; but if it's my little friend Molly,
I'll go to church and forbid the banns."

"Really, Harriet, I can't think what always makes you take such an
interest in all these petty Hollingford affairs."

"Mamma, it's only tit for tat. They take the most lively interest
in all our sayings and doings. If I were going to be married, they
would want to know every possible particular,--when we first met,
what we first said to each other, what I wore, and whether he offered
by letter or in person. I'm sure those good Miss Brownings were
wonderfully well-informed as to Mary's methods of managing her
nursery, and educating her girls; so it's only a proper return of the
compliment to want to know on our side how they are going on. I'm
quite of papa's faction. I like to hear all the local gossip."

"Especially when it is flavoured with a spice of scandal and
impropriety, as in this case," said Lady Cumnor, with the momentary
bitterness of a convalescent invalid. Lady Harriet coloured with
annoyance. But then she rallied her courage, and said with more
gravity than before,--

"I am really interested in this story about Molly Gibson, I own. I
both like and respect her; and I do not like to hear her name coupled
with that of Mr. Preston. I can't help fancying papa has made some
mistake."

"No, my dear. I'm sure I'm repeating what I heard. I'm sorry I said
anything about it, if it annoys you or my lady there. Sheepshanks did
say Miss Gibson, though, and he went on to say it was a pity the girl
had got herself so talked about; for it was the way they had carried
on that gave rise to all the chatter. Preston himself was a very
fair match for her, and nobody could have objected to it. But I'll
try and find a more agreeable piece of news. Old Margery at the
lodge is dead; and they don't know where to find some one to teach
clear-starching at your school; and Robert Hall made forty pounds
last year by his apples." So they drifted away from Molly and her
affairs; only Lady Harriet kept turning what she had heard over in
her own mind with interest and wonder.

"I warned her against him the day of her father's wedding. And what
a straightforward, out-spoken topic it was then! I don't believe it;
it's only one of old Sheepshanks' stories, half invention and half
deafness."

The next day Lady Harriet rode over to Hollingford, and for the
settling of her curiosity she called on Miss Brownings, and
introduced the subject. She would not have spoken about the rumour
she had heard to any who were not warm friends of Molly's. If Mr.
Sheepshanks had chosen to allude to it when she had been riding with
her father, she would very soon have silenced him by one of the
haughty looks she knew full well how to assume. But she felt as if
she must know the truth, and accordingly she began thus abruptly to
Miss Browning:

"What is all this I hear about my little friend Molly Gibson and Mr.
Preston?"

"Oh, Lady Harriet! have you heard of it? We are so sorry!"

"Sorry for what?"

"I think, begging your ladyship's pardon, we had better not say any
more till we know how much you know," said Miss Browning.

"Nay," replied Lady Harriet, laughing a little, "I shan't tell what I
know till I am sure you know more. Then we'll make an exchange if you
like."

"I'm afraid it's no laughing matter for poor Molly," said Miss
Browning, shaking her head. "People do say such things!"

"But I don't believe them; indeed I don't," burst in Miss Phoebe,
half crying.

"No more will I, then," said Lady Harriet, taking the good lady's
hand.

"It's all very fine, Phoebe, saying you don't believe them, but I
should like to know who it was that convinced me, sadly against my
will, I am sure."

"I only told you the facts as Mrs. Goodenough told them me, sister;
but I'm sure if you had seen poor patient Molly as I have done,
sitting up in a corner of a room, looking at the _Beauties of England
and Wales_ till she must have been sick of them, and no one speaking
to her; and she as gentle and sweet as ever at the end of the
evening, though maybe a bit pale--facts or no facts, I won't believe
anything against her."

So there sate Miss Phoebe, in tearful defiance of facts.

"And, as I said before, I'm quite of your opinion," said Lady
Harriet.

"But how does your ladyship explain away her meetings with Mr.
Preston in all sorts of unlikely and open-air places?" asked Miss
Browning,--who, to do her justice, would have been only too glad to
join Molly's partisans, if she could have preserved her character for
logical deduction at the same time. "I went so far as to send for her
father and tell him all about it. I thought at least he would have
horsewhipped Mr. Preston; but he seems to have taken no notice of
it."

"Then we may be quite sure he knows some way of explaining matters
that we don't," said Lady Harriet, decisively. "After all, there
may be a hundred and fifty perfectly natural and justifiable
explanations."

"Mr. Gibson knew of none when I thought it my duty to speak to him,"
said Miss Browning.

"Why, suppose that Mr. Preston is engaged to Miss Kirkpatrick, and
Molly is confidante and messenger?"

"I don't see that your ladyship's supposition much alters the blame.
Why, if he is honourably engaged to Cynthia Kirkpatrick, does he not
visit her openly at her home in Mr. Gibson's house? Why does Molly
lend herself to clandestine proceedings?"

"One can't account for everything," said Lady Harriet, a little
impatiently, for reason was going hard against her. "But I choose to
have faith in Molly Gibson. I'm sure she's not done anything very
wrong. I've a great mind to go and call on her--Mrs. Gibson is
confined to her room with this horrid influenza--and take her with
me on a round of calls through this little gossiping town,--on Mrs.
Goodenough, or Badenough, who seems to have been propagating all
these stories. But I've not time to-day. I've to meet papa at three,
and it's three now. Only remember, Miss Phoebe, it's you and I
against the world, in defence of a distressed damsel."

"Don Quixote and Sancho Panza!" said she to herself as she ran
lightly down Miss Browning's old-fashioned staircase.

"Now, I don't think that's pretty of you, Phoebe," said Miss
Browning in some displeasure, as soon as she was alone with her
sister. "First, you convince me against my will, and make me very
unhappy; and I have to do unpleasant things, all because you've made
me believe that certain statements are true; and then you turn round
and cry, and say you don't believe a word of it all, making me out
a regular ogre and backbiter. No! it's of no use. I shan't listen
to you." So she left Miss Phoebe in tears, and locked herself up in
her own room.

Lady Harriet, meanwhile, was riding homewards by her father's side,
apparently listening to all he chose to say, but in reality turning
over the probabilities and possibilities that might account for these
strange interviews between Molly and Mr. Preston. It was a case of
_parler de l'ëne et l'on en voit les oreilles_. At a turn in the road
they saw Mr. Preston a little way before them, coming towards them on
his good horse, _point device_, in his riding attire.

The earl, in his thread-bare coat, and on his old brown cob, called
out cheerfully,--

"Aha! here's Preston. Good-day to you. I was just wanting to ask you
about that slip of pasture-land on the Home Farm. John Brickkill
wants to plough it up and crop it. It's not two acres at the best."

While they were talking over this bit of land, Lady Harriet came to
her resolution. As soon as her father had finished, she said,--"Mr.
Preston, perhaps you will allow me to ask you one or two questions to
relieve my mind, for I am in some little perplexity at present."


[Illustration: LADY HARRIET ASKS ONE OR TWO QUESTIONS.]


"Certainly; I shall only be too happy to give you any information in
my power." But the moment after he had made this polite speech, he
recollected Molly's speech--that she would refer her case to Lady
Harriet. But the letters had been returned, and the affair was now
wound up. She had come off conqueror, he the vanquished. Surely she
would never have been so ungenerous as to appeal after that.

"There are reports about Miss Gibson and you current among the
gossips of Hollingford. Are we to congratulate you on your engagement
to that young lady?"

"Ah! by the way, Preston, we ought to have done it before,"
interrupted Lord Cumnor, in hasty goodwill. But his daughter said
quietly, "Mr. Preston has not yet told us if the reports are well
founded, papa."

She looked at him with the air of a person expecting an answer, and
expecting a truthful answer.

"I am not so fortunate," replied he, trying to make his horse appear
fidgety, without incurring observation.

"Then I may contradict that report?" asked Lady Harriet quickly. "Or
is there any reason for believing that in time it may come true? I
ask because such reports, if unfounded, do harm to young ladies."

"Keep other sweethearts off," put in Lord Cumnor, looking a good deal
pleased at his own discernment. Lady Harriet went on:--

"And I take a great interest in Miss Gibson."

Mr. Preston saw from her manner that he was "in for it," as he
expressed it to himself. The question was, how much or how little did
she know?

"I have no expectation or hope of ever having a nearer interest
in Miss Gibson than I have at present. I shall be glad if this
straightforward answer relieves your ladyship from your perplexity."

He could not help the touch of insolence that accompanied these last
words. It was not in the words themselves, nor in the tone in which
they were spoken, nor in the look which accompanied them, it was in
all; it implied a doubt of Lady Harriet's right to question him as
she did; and there was something of defiance in it as well. But this
touch of insolence put Lady Harriet's mettle up; and she was not one
to check herself, in any course, for the opinion of an inferior.

"Then, sir! are you aware of the injury you may do to a young lady's
reputation if you meet her, and detain her in long conversations,
when she is walking by herself, unaccompanied by any one? You give
rise--you have given rise to reports."

"My dear Harriet, are not you going too far? You don't know--Mr.
Preston may have intentions--unacknowledged intentions."

"No, my lord. I have no intentions with regard to Miss Gibson. She
may be a very worthy young lady--I have no doubt she is. Lady Harriet
seems determined to push me into such a position that I cannot
but acknowledge myself to be--it is not enviable--not pleasant to
own--but I am, in fact, a jilted man; jilted by Miss Kirkpatrick,
after a tolerably long engagement. My interviews with Miss Gibson
were not of the most agreeable kind--as you may conclude when I
tell you she was, I believe, the instigator--certainly, she was the
agent in this last step of Miss Kirkpatrick's. Is your ladyship's
curiosity" (with an emphasis on this last word) "satisfied with this
rather mortifying confession of mine?"

"Harriet, my dear, you've gone too far--we had no right to pry into
Mr. Preston's private affairs."

"No more I had," said Lady Harriet, with a smile of winning
frankness: the first smile she had accorded to Mr. Preston for many
a long day; ever since the time, years ago, when, presuming on his
handsomeness, he had assumed a tone of gallant familiarity with Lady
Harriet, and paid her personal compliments as he would have done to
an equal.

"But he will excuse me, I hope," continued she, still in that
gracious manner which made him feel that he now held a much higher
place in her esteem than he had had at the beginning of their
interview, "when he learns that the busy tongues of the Hollingford
ladies have been speaking of my friend, Miss Gibson, in the most
unwarrantable manner; drawing unjustifiable inferences from the facts
of that intercourse with Mr. Preston, the nature of which he has just
conferred such a real obligation on me by explaining."

"I think I need hardly request Lady Harriet to consider this
explanation of mine as confidential," said Mr. Preston.

"Of course, of course!" said the earl; "every one will understand
that." And he rode home, and told his wife and Lady Cuxhaven the
whole conversation between Lady Harriet and Mr. Preston; in the
strictest confidence, of course. Lady Harriet had to stand a good
many strictures on manners, and proper dignity for a few days after
this. However, she consoled herself by calling on the Gibsons; and,
finding that Mrs. Gibson (who was still an invalid) was asleep at the
time, she experienced no difficulty in carrying off the unconscious
Molly for a walk, which Lady Harriet so contrived that they twice
passed through all the length of the principal street of the town,
loitered at Grinstead's for half an hour, and wound up by Lady
Harriet's calling on the Miss Brownings, who, to her regret, were not
at home.

"Perhaps, it's as well," said she, after a minute's consideration.
"I'll leave my card, and put your name down underneath it, Molly."

Molly was a little puzzled by the manner in which she had been taken
possession of, like an inanimate chattel, for all the afternoon, and
exclaimed,--"Please, Lady Harriet--I never leave cards; I have not
got any, and on the Miss Brownings, of all people; why, I am in and
out whenever I like."

"Never mind, little one. To-day you shall do everything properly, and
according to full etiquette."

"And now tell Mrs. Gibson to come out to the Towers for a long day;
we will send the carriage for her whenever she will let us know that
she is strong enough to come. Indeed, she had better come for a few
days; at this time of the year it doesn't do for an invalid to be out
in the evenings, even in a carriage." So spoke Lady Harriet, standing
on the white door-steps at Miss Brownings', and holding Molly's hand
while she wished her good-by. "You'll tell her, dear, that I came
partly to see her--but that finding her asleep, I ran off with you,
and don't forget about her coming to stay with us for change of
air--mamma will like it, I'm sure--and the carriage, and all that.
And now good-by, we've done a good day's work! And better than you're
aware of," continued she, still addressing Molly, though the latter
was quite out of hearing. "Hollingford is not the place I take it
to be, if it doesn't veer round in Miss Gibson's favour after my
to-day's trotting of that child about."




CHAPTER L.

CYNTHIA AT BAY.


Mrs. Gibson was slow in recovering her strength after the influenza,
and before she was well enough to accept Lady Harriet's invitation to
the Towers, Cynthia came home from London. If Molly had thought her
manner of departure was scarcely as affectionate and considerate as
it might have been,--if such a thought had crossed Molly's fancy
for an instant, she was repentant for it as soon as ever Cynthia
returned, and the girls met together face to face, with all the old
familiar affection, going upstairs to the drawing-room, with their
arms round each other's waists, and sitting there together hand in
hand. Cynthia's whole manner was more quiet than it had been, when
the weight of her unpleasant secret rested on her mind, and made her
alternately despondent or flighty.

"After all," said Cynthia, "there's a look of home about these rooms
which is very pleasant. But I wish I could see you looking stronger,
mamma! that's the only unpleasant thing. Molly, why didn't you send
for me?"

"I wanted to do," began Molly--

"But I wouldn't let her," said Mrs. Gibson. "You were much better
in London than here, for you could have done me no good; and your
letters were very agreeable to read; and now Helen is better, and
I'm nearly well, and you've come home just at the right time, for
everybody is full of the Charity Ball."

"But we are not going this year, mamma," said Cynthia decidedly.
"It's on the 25th, isn't it? and I'm sure you'll never be well enough
to take us."

"You really seem determined to make me out worse than I am, child,"
said Mrs. Gibson, rather querulously, she being one of those who,
when their malady is only trifling, exaggerate it, but when it is
really of some consequence, are unwilling to sacrifice any pleasures
by acknowledging it. It was well for her in this instance that her
husband had wisdom and authority enough to forbid her going to
this ball, on which she had set her heart; but the consequence of
his prohibition was an increase of domestic plaintiveness and low
spirits, which seemed to tell on Cynthia--the bright gay Cynthia
herself--and it was often hard work for Molly to keep up the spirits
of two other people as well as her own. Ill-health might account for
Mrs. Gibson's despondency, but why was Cynthia so silent, not to say
so sighing? Molly was puzzled to account for it; and all the more
perplexed because from time to time Cynthia kept calling upon her for
praise for some unknown and mysterious virtue that she had practised;
and Molly was young enough to believe that, after any exercise of
virtue, the spirits rose, cheered up by an approving conscience.
Such was not the case with Cynthia, however. She sometimes said
such things as these, when she had been particularly inert and
desponding:--

"Ah, Molly, you must let my goodness lie fallow for a while!
It has borne such a wonderful crop this year. I have been so
pretty-behaved--if you knew all!" Or, "Really, Molly, my virtue
must come down from the clouds! It was strained to the utmost in
London--and I find it is like a kite--after soaring aloft for some
time, it suddenly comes down, and gets tangled in all sorts of
briars and brambles; which things are an allegory, unless you can
bring yourself to believe in my extraordinary goodness while I was
away--giving me a sort of right to fall foul of all mamma's briars
and brambles now."

But Molly had had some experience of Cynthia's whim of perpetually
hinting at a mystery which she did not mean to reveal in the Mr.
Preston days, and, although she was occasionally piqued into
curiosity, Cynthia's allusions at something more in the background
fell in general on rather deaf ears. One day the mystery burst its
shell, and came out in the shape of an offer made to Cynthia by Mr.
Henderson--and refused. Under all the circumstances, Molly could not
appreciate the heroic goodness so often alluded to. The revelation of
the secret at last took place in this way. Mrs. Gibson breakfasted
in bed: she had done so ever since she had had the influenza;
and, consequently, her own private letters always went up on her
breakfast-tray. One morning she came into the drawing-room earlier
than usual, with an open letter in her hand.

"I've had a letter from aunt Kirkpatrick, Cynthia. She sends me my
dividends,--your uncle is so busy. But what does she mean by this,
Cynthia?" (holding out the letter to her, with a certain paragraph
indicated by her finger). Cynthia put her netting on one side, and
looked at the writing. Suddenly her face turned scarlet, and then
became of a deadly white. She looked at Molly, as if to gain courage
from the strong serene countenance.

"It means--mamma, I may as well tell you at once--Mr. Henderson
offered to me while I was in London, and I refused him."

"Refused him--and you never told me, but let me hear it by chance!
Really, Cynthia, I think you're very unkind. And pray what made you
refuse Mr. Henderson? Such a fine young man,--and such a gentleman!
Your uncle told me he had a very good private fortune besides."

"Mamma, do you forget that I have promised to marry Roger Hamley?"
said Cynthia quietly.

"No! of course I don't--how can I, with Molly always dinning the word
'engagement' into my ears? But really, when one considers all the
uncertainties,--and after all it was not a distinct promise,--he
seemed almost as if he might have looked forward to something of this
sort."

"Of what sort, mamma?" said Cynthia, sharply.

"Why, of a more eligible offer. He must have known you might change
your mind, and meet with some one you liked better: so little as you
had seen of the world." Cynthia made an impatient movement, as if to
stop her mother.

"I never said I liked him better,--how can you talk so, mamma? I'm
going to marry Roger, and there's an end of it. I will not be spoken
to about it again." She got up and left the room.

"Going to marry Roger! That's all very fine. But who is to guarantee
his coming back alive? And if he does, what have they to marry
upon, I should like to know? I don't wish her to have accepted Mr.
Henderson, though I am sure she liked him; and true love ought to
have its course, and not be thwarted; but she need not have quite
finally refused him until--well, until we had seen how matters turn
out. Such an invalid as I am too! It has given me quite a palpitation
at the heart. I do call it quite unfeeling of Cynthia."

"Certainly,--" began Molly; but then she remembered that her
stepmother was far from strong, and unable to bear a protest in
favour of the right course without irritation. So she changed her
speech into a suggestion of remedies for palpitation; and curbed her
impatience to speak out her indignation at the contemplated falsehood
to Roger. But when they were alone, and Cynthia began upon the
subject, Molly was less merciful. Cynthia said,--

"Well, Molly, and now you know all! I've been longing to tell
you--and yet somehow I could not."

"I suppose it was a repetition of Mr. Coxe," said Molly, gravely.
"You were agreeable,--and he took it for something more."

"I don't know," sighed Cynthia. "I mean I don't know if I was
agreeable or not. He was very kind--very pleasant--but I did not
expect it all to end as it did. However, it's of no use thinking of
it."

"No!" said Molly, simply; for to her mind the pleasantest and kindest
person in the world put in comparison with Roger was as nothing; he
stood by himself. Cynthia's next words,--and they did not come very
soon,--were on quite a different subject, and spoken in rather a
pettish tone. Nor did she allude again in jesting sadness to her late
efforts at virtue.

In a little while Mrs. Gibson was able to accept the often-repeated
invitation from the Towers to go and stay there for a day or two.
Lady Harriet told her that it would be a kindness to Lady Cumnor to
come and bear her company in the life of seclusion the latter was
still compelled to lead; and Mrs. Gibson was flattered and gratified
with a dim unconscious sense of being really wanted, not merely
deluding herself into a pleasing fiction. Lady Cumnor was in that
state of convalescence common to many invalids. The spring of
life had begun again to flow, and with the flow returned the old
desires and projects and plans, which had all become mere matters of
indifference during the worst part of her illness. But as yet her
bodily strength was not sufficient to be an agent to her energetic
mind, and the difficulty of driving the ill-matched pair of body and
will--the one weak and languid, the other strong and stern,--made
her ladyship often very irritable. Mrs. Gibson herself was not quite
strong enough for a "_souffre-douleur_;" and the visit to the Towers
was not, on the whole, quite so happy a one as she had anticipated.
Lady Cuxhaven and Lady Harriet, each aware of their mother's state
of health and temper, but only alluding to it as slightly as was
absolutely necessary in their conversations with each other, took
care not to leave "Clare" too long with Lady Cumnor; but several
times when one or the other went to relieve guard they found Clare in
tears, and Lady Cumnor holding forth on some point on which she had
been meditating during the silent hours of her illness, and on which
she seemed to consider herself born to set the world to rights. Mrs.
Gibson was always apt to consider these remarks as addressed with a
personal direction at some error of her own, and defended the fault
in question with a sense of property in it, whatever it might happen
to be. The second and the last day of her stay at the Towers, Lady
Harriet came in, and found her mother haranguing in an excited tone
of voice, and Clare looking submissive and miserable and oppressed.

"What's the matter, dear mamma? Are not you tiring yourself with
talking?"

"No, not at all! I was only speaking of the folly of people dressing
above their station. I began by telling Clare of the fashions of
my grandmother's days, when every class had a sort of costume of
its own,--and servants did not ape tradespeople, nor tradespeople
professional men, and so on,--and what must the foolish woman do but
begin to justify her own dress, as if I had been accusing her, or
even thinking about her at all. Such nonsense! Really, Clare, your
husband has spoilt you sadly, if you can't listen to any one without
thinking they are alluding to you. People may flatter themselves
just as much by thinking that their faults are always present to
other people's minds, as if they believe that the world is always
contemplating their individual charms and virtues."

"I was told, Lady Cumnor, that this silk was reduced in price. I
bought it at Waterloo House after the season was over," said Mrs.
Gibson, touching the very handsome gown she wore in deprecation of
Lady Cumnor's angry voice, and blundering on to the very source of
irritation.

"Again, Clare! How often must I tell you I had no thought of you or
your gowns, or whether they cost much or little; your husband has to
pay for them, and it is his concern if you spend more on your dress
than you ought to do."

"It was only five guineas for the whole dress," pleaded Mrs. Gibson.

"And very pretty it is," said Lady Harriet, stooping to examine it,
and so hoping to soothe the poor aggrieved woman. But Lady Cumnor
went on,--

"No! you ought to have known me better by this time. When I
think a thing I say it out. I don't beat about the bush. I use
straightforward language. I will tell you where I think you have
been in fault, Clare, if you like to know." Like it or not, the
plain-speaking was coming now. "You have spoilt that girl of yours
till she does not know her own mind. She has behaved abominably
to Mr. Preston; and it is all in consequence of the faults in her
education. You have much to answer for."

"Mamma, mamma!" said Lady Harriet, "Mr. Preston did not wish
it spoken about." And at the same moment Mrs. Gibson exclaimed,
"Cynthia--Mr. Preston!" in such a tone of surprise, that if Lady
Cumnor had been in the habit of observing the revelations made by
other people's tones and voices, she would have found out that Mrs.
Gibson was ignorant of the affair to which she was alluding.

"As for Mr. Preston's wishes, I do not suppose I am bound to regard
them when I feel it my duty to reprove error," said Lady Cumnor
loftily to Lady Harriet. "And, Clare, do you mean to say that you are
not aware that your daughter has been engaged to Mr. Preston for some
time--years, I believe,--and has at last chosen to break it off,--and
has used the Gibson girl--I forget her name--as a cat's-paw, and made
both her and herself the town's talk--the butt for all the gossip
of Hollingford? I remember when I was young there was a girl called
Jilting Jessy. You'll have to watch over your young lady, or she
will get some such name. I speak to you like a friend, Clare, when
I tell you it's my opinion that girl of yours will get herself into
some more mischief yet before she's safely married. Not that I care
one straw for Mr. Preston's feelings. I don't even know if he's got
feelings or not; but I know what is becoming in a young woman, and
jilting is not. And now you may both go away, and send Bradley to me,
for I'm tired, and want to have a little sleep."

"Indeed, Lady Cumnor--will you believe me?--I do not think Cynthia
was ever engaged to Mr. Preston. There was an old flirtation. I was
afraid--"

"Ring the bell for Bradley," said Lady Cumnor, wearily: her eyes
closed. Lady Harriet had too much experience of her mother's moods
not to lead Mrs. Gibson away almost by main force, she protesting
all the while that she did not think there was any truth in the
statement, though it was dear Lady Cumnor that said it.

Once in her own room, Lady Harriet said, "Now, Clare, I'll tell
you all about it; and I think you'll have to believe it, for it
was Mr. Preston himself who told me. I heard of a great commotion
in Hollingford about Mr. Preston; and I met him riding out, and
asked him what it was all about; he didn't want to speak about it,
evidently. No man does, I suppose, when he's been jilted; and he made
both papa and me promise not to tell; but papa did--and that's what
mamma has for a foundation; you see, a really good one."

"But Cynthia is engaged to another man--she really is. And another--a
very good match indeed--has just been offering to her in London. Mr.
Preston is always at the root of mischief."

"Nay! I do think in this case it must be that pretty Miss Cynthia
of yours who has drawn on one man to be engaged to her,--not to say
two,--and another to make her an offer. I can't endure Mr. Preston,
but I think it's rather hard to accuse him of having called up the
rivals, who are, I suppose, the occasion of his being jilted."

"I don't know; I always feel as if he owed me a grudge, and men have
so many ways of being spiteful. You must acknowledge that if he had
not met you I should not have had dear Lady Cumnor so angry with me."

"She only wanted to warn you about Cynthia. Mamma has always been
very particular about her own daughters. She has been very severe on
the least approach to flirting, and Mary will be like her!"

"But Cynthia will flirt, and I can't help it. She is not noisy, or
giggling; she is always a lady--that everybody must own. But she
has a way of attracting men, she must have inherited from me, I
think." And here she smiled faintly, and would not have rejected a
confirmatory compliment, but none came. "However, I will speak to
her; I will get to the bottom of the whole affair. Pray tell Lady
Cumnor that it has so fluttered me the way she spoke, about my dress
and all. And it only cost five guineas after all, reduced from
eight!"

"Well, never mind now. You are looking very much flushed; quite
feverish! I left you too long in mamma's hot room. But do you know
she is so much pleased to have you here?" And so Lady Cumnor really
was, in spite of the continual lectures which she gave "Clare," and
which poor Mrs. Gibson turned under as helplessly as the typical
worm. Still it was something to have a countess to scold her; and
that pleasure would endure when the worry was past. And then Lady
Harriet petted her more than usual to make up for what she had to go
through in the convalescent's room; and Lady Cuxhaven talked sense to
her, with dashes of science and deep thought intermixed, which was
very flattering, although generally unintelligible; and Lord Cumnor,
good-natured, good-tempered, kind, and liberal, was full of gratitude
to her for her kindness in coming to see Lady Cumnor, and his
gratitude took the tangible shape of a haunch of venison, to say
nothing of lesser game. When she looked back upon her visit, as she
drove home in the solitary grandeur of the Towers' carriage, there
had been but one great enduring rub--Lady Cumnor's crossness--and she
chose to consider Cynthia as the cause of that, instead of seeing the
truth, which had been so often set before her by the members of her
ladyship's family, that it took its origin in her state of health.
Mrs. Gibson did not exactly mean to visit this one discomfort upon
Cynthia, nor did she quite mean to upbraid her daughter for conduct
as yet unexplained, and which might have some justification; but,
finding her quietly sitting in the drawing-room, she sate down
despondingly in her own little easy chair, and in reply to Cynthia's
quick pleasant greeting of--

"Well, mamma, how are you? We didn't expect you so early! Let me take
off your bonnet and shawl!" she replied dolefully,--

"It has not been such a happy visit that I should wish to prolong
it." Her eyes were fixed on the carpet, and her face was as
irresponsive to the welcome offered as she could make it.

"What has been the matter?" asked Cynthia, in all good faith.

"You! Cynthia--you! I little thought when you were born how I should
have to bear to hear you spoken about."

Cynthia threw back her head, and angry light came into her eyes.

"What business have they with me? How came they to talk about me in
any way?"

"Everybody is talking about you; it is no wonder they are. Lord
Cumnor is sure to hear about everything always. You should take more
care about what you do, Cynthia, if you don't like being talked
about."

"It rather depends upon what people say," said Cynthia, affecting a
lightness which she did not feel; for she had a prevision of what was
coming.

"Well! I don't like it, at any rate. It is not pleasant to me to hear
first of my daughter's misdoings from Lady Cumnor, and then to be
lectured about her, and her flirting, and her jilting, as if I had
had anything to do with it. I can assure you it has quite spoilt my
visit. No! don't touch my shawl. When I go to my room I can take it
myself."

Cynthia was brought to bay, and sate down; remaining with her mother,
who kept sighing ostentatiously from time to time.

"Would you mind telling me what they said? If there are accusations
abroad against me, it is as well I should know what they are. Here's
Molly" (as the girl entered the room, fresh from a morning's walk).
"Molly, mamma has come back from the Towers, and my lord and my
lady have been doing me the honour to talk over my crimes and
misdemeanors, and I am asking mamma what they have said. I don't set
up for more virtue than other people, but I can't make out what an
earl and a countess have to do with poor little me."

"It was not for your sake!" said Mrs. Gibson. "It was for mine. They
felt for me, for it is not pleasant to have one's child's name in
everybody's mouth."

"As I said before, that depends upon how it is in everybody's mouth.
If I were going to marry Lord Hollingford, I make no doubt every one
would be talking about me, and neither you nor I should mind it in
the least."

"But this is no marriage with Lord Hollingford, so it is nonsense to
talk as if it was. They say you've gone and engaged yourself to Mr.
Preston, and now refuse to marry him; and they call that jilting."

"Do you wish me to marry him, mamma?" asked Cynthia, her face in
a flame, her eyes cast down. Molly stood by, very hot, not fully
understanding it; and only kept where she was by the hope of coming
in as sweetener or peacemaker, or helper of some kind.

"No," said Mrs. Gibson, evidently discomfited by the question. "Of
course I don't; you have gone and entangled yourself with Roger
Hamley, a very worthy young man; but nobody knows where he is, and if
he's dead or alive; and he has not a penny if he is alive."

"I beg your pardon. I know that he has some fortune from his mother;
it may not be much, but he is not penniless; and he is sure to
earn fame and great reputation, and with it money will come," said
Cynthia.

"You've entangled yourself with him, and you've done something of the
sort with Mr. Preston, and got yourself into such an imbroglio" (Mrs.
Gibson could not have said "mess" for the world, although the word
was present to her mind), "that when a really eligible person comes
forward--handsome, agreeable, and quite the gentleman--and a good
private fortune into the bargain, you have to refuse him. You'll end
as an old maid, Cynthia, and it will break my heart."

"I daresay I shall," said Cynthia, quietly. "I sometimes think I'm
the kind of person of which old maids are made!" She spoke seriously,
and a little sadly.

Mrs. Gibson began again. "I don't want to know your secrets as long
as they are secrets; but when all the town is talking about you, I
think I ought to be told."

"But, mamma, I didn't know I was such a subject of conversation; and
even now I can't make out how it has come about."

"No more can I. I only know that they say you've been engaged to Mr.
Preston, and ought to have married him, and that I can't help it, if
you did not choose, any more than I could have helped your refusing
Mr. Henderson; and yet I am constantly blamed for your misconduct.
I think it's very hard." Mrs. Gibson began to cry. Just then her
husband came in.

"You here, my dear! Welcome back," said he, coming up to her
courteously, and kissing her cheek. "Why, what's the matter? Tears?"
and he heartily wished himself away again.

"Yes!" said she, raising herself up, and clutching after sympathy of
any kind, at any price. "I'm come home again, and I'm telling Cynthia
how Lady Cumnor has been so cross to me, and all through her. Did you
know she had gone and engaged herself to Mr. Preston, and then broken
it off? Everybody is talking about it, and they know it up at the
Towers."

For one moment his eyes met Molly's, and he comprehended it all. He
made his lips up into a whistle, but no sound came. Cynthia had quite
lost her defiant manner since her mother had spoken to Mr. Gibson.
Molly sate down by her.

"Cynthia," said he, very seriously.

"Yes!" she answered, softly.

"Is this true? I had heard something of it before--not much; but
there is scandal enough about to make it desirable that you should
have some protector--some friend who knows the whole truth."

No answer. At last she said, "Molly knows it all."

Mrs. Gibson, too, had been awed into silence by her husband's grave
manner, and she did not like to give vent to the jealous thought in
her mind that Molly had known the secret of which she was ignorant.
Mr. Gibson replied to Cynthia with some sternness:

"Yes! I know that Molly knows it all, and that she has had to bear
slander and ill words for your sake, Cynthia. But she refused to tell
me more."

"She told you that much, did she?" said Cynthia, aggrieved.

"I could not help it," said Molly.

"She didn't name your name," said Mr. Gibson. "At the time I believe
she thought she had concealed it--but there was no mistaking who it
was."

"Why did she speak about it at all?" said Cynthia, with some
bitterness. Her tone--her question stirred up Mr. Gibson's passion.

"It was necessary for her to justify herself to me--I heard my
daughter's reputation attacked for the private meetings she had given
to Mr. Preston--I came to her for an explanation. There's no need to
be ungenerous, Cynthia, because you've been a flirt and a jilt, even
to the degree of dragging Molly's name down into the same mire."

Cynthia lifted her bowed-down head, and looked at him.

"You say that of me, Mr. Gibson? Not knowing what the circumstances
are, you say that?"

He had spoken too strongly: he knew it. But he could not bring
himself to own it just at that moment. The thought of his sweet
innocent Molly, who had borne so much patiently, prevented any
retractation of his words at the time.

"Yes!" he said, "I do say it. You cannot tell what evil constructions
are put upon actions ever so slightly beyond the bounds of maidenly
propriety. I do say that Molly has had a great deal to bear, in
consequence of this clandestine engagement of yours, Cynthia--there
may be extenuating circumstances, I acknowledge--but you will need
to remember them all to excuse your conduct to Roger Hamley, when
he comes home. I asked you to tell me the full truth, in order that
until he comes, and has a legal right to protect you, I may do so."
No answer. "It certainly requires explanation," continued he. "Here
are you,--engaged to two men at once to all appearances!" Still no
answer. "To be sure, the gossips of the town haven't yet picked out
the fact of Roger Hamley's being your accepted lover; but scandal has
been resting on Molly, and ought to have rested on you, Cynthia--for
a concealed engagement to Mr. Preston--necessitating meetings in all
sorts of places unknown to your friends."

"Papa," said Molly, "if you knew all you wouldn't speak so to
Cynthia. I wish she would tell you herself all that she has told me."

"I am ready to hear whatever she has to say," said he. But Cynthia
said,--

"No! you have prejudged me; you have spoken to me as you had no right
to speak. I refuse to give you my confidence, or accept your help.
People are very cruel to me"--her voice trembled for a moment--"I did
not think you would have been. But I can bear it."

And then, in spite of Molly, who would have detained her by force,
she tore herself away, and hastily left the room.

"Oh, papa!" said Molly, crying, and clinging to him, "do let me
tell you all." And then she suddenly recollected the awkwardness of
telling some of the details of the story before Mrs. Gibson, and
stopped short.

"I think, Mr. Gibson, you have been very very unkind to my poor
fatherless child," said Mrs. Gibson, emerging from behind her
pocket-handkerchief. "I only wish her poor father had been alive,
and all this would never have happened."

"Very probably. Still I cannot see of what either she or you have to
complain. Inasmuch as we could, I and mine have sheltered her! I have
loved her; I do love her almost as if she were my own child--as well
as Molly, I do not pretend to do."

"That's it, Mr. Gibson! you do not treat her like your own child."
But in the midst of this wrangle Molly stole out, and went in search
of Cynthia. She thought she bore an olive-branch of healing in the
sound of her father's just spoken words: "I do love her almost as if
she were my own child." But Cynthia was locked into her room, and
refused to open the door.

"Open to me, please," pleaded Molly. "I have something to say to
you--I want to see you--do open!"

"No!" said Cynthia. "Not now. I am busy. Leave me alone. I don't want
to hear what you have got to say. I don't want to see you. By-and-by
we shall meet, and then--" Molly stood quite quietly, wondering
what new words of more persuasion she could use. In a minute or two
Cynthia called out, "Are you there still, Molly?" and when Molly
answered "Yes," and hoped for a relenting, the same hard metallic
voice, telling of resolution and repression, spoke out, "Go away. I
cannot bear the feeling of your being there--waiting and listening.
Go downstairs--out of the house--anywhere away. It is the most you
can do for me now."




CHAPTER LI.

"TROUBLES NEVER COME ALONE."


[Illustration (untitled)]

Molly had her out-of-door things on, and she crept away as she was
bidden. She lifted her heavy weight of heart and body along till
she came to a field, not so very far off,--where she had sought the
comfort of loneliness ever since she was a child; and there, under
the hedge-bank, she sate down, burying her face in her hands, and
quivering all over as she thought of Cynthia's misery, which she
might not try to touch or assuage. She never knew how long she sate
there, but it was long past lunch-time when once again she stole
up to her room. The door opposite was open wide,--Cynthia had
quitted the chamber. Molly arranged her dress and went down into the
drawing-room. Cynthia and her mother sate there in the stern repose
of an armed neutrality. Cynthia's face looked made of stone, for
colour and rigidity; but she was netting away as if nothing unusual
had occurred. Not so Mrs. Gibson; her face bore evident marks of
tears, and she looked up and greeted Molly's entrance with a faint
smiling notice. Cynthia went on as though she had never heard the
opening of the door, or felt the approaching sweep of Molly's dress.
Molly took up a book,--not to read, but to have the semblance of some
employment which should not necessitate conversation.

There was no measuring the duration of the silence that ensued. Molly
grew to fancy it was some old enchantment that weighed upon their
tongues and kept them still. At length Cynthia spoke, but she had to
begin again before her words came clear.

"I wish you both to know that henceforward all is at an end between
me and Roger Hamley."

Molly's book went down upon her knees; with open eyes and lips she
strove to draw in Cynthia's meaning. Mrs. Gibson spoke querulously,
as if injured,--

"I could have understood this if it had happened three months
ago,--when you were in London; but now it's just nonsense, Cynthia,
and you know you don't mean it!"

Cynthia did not reply; nor did the resolute look on her face change
when Molly spoke at last,--

"Cynthia--think of him! It will break his heart!"

"No!" said Cynthia, "it will not. But even if it did I cannot help
it."

"All this talk will soon pass away!" said Molly; "and when he knows
the truth from your own self--"

"From my own self he shall never hear it. I do not love him well
enough to go through the shame of having to excuse myself,--to
plead that he will reinstate me in his good opinion. Confession may
be--well! I can never believe it pleasant--but it may be an ease of
mind if one makes it to some people,--to some person,--and it may not
be a mortification to sue for forgiveness. I cannot tell. All I know
is,--and I know it clearly, and will act upon it inflexibly--that--"
And here she stopped short.

"I think you might finish your sentence," said her mother, after a
silence of five seconds.

"I cannot bear to exculpate myself to Roger Hamley. I will not submit
to his thinking less well of me than he has done,--however foolish
his judgment may have been. I would rather never see him again, for
these two reasons. And the truth is, I do not love him. I like him, I
respect him; but I will not marry him. I have written to tell him so.
That was merely as a relief to myself, for when or where the letter
will reach him-- And I have written to old Mr. Hamley. The relief
is the one good thing come out of it all. It is such a comfort
to feel free again. It wearied me so to think of straining up to
his goodness. 'Extenuate my conduct!'" she concluded, quoting Mr.
Gibson's words. Yet when Mr. Gibson came home, after a silent dinner,
she asked to speak with him, alone, in his consulting-room; and there
laid bare the exculpation of herself which she had given to Molly
many weeks before. When she had ended, she said:

"And now, Mr. Gibson,--I still treat you like a friend,--help me to
find some home far away, where all the evil talking and gossip mamma
tells me of cannot find me and follow me. It may be wrong to care
for people's good opinion,--but it is me, and I cannot alter myself.
You, Molly,--all the people in the town,--I haven't the patience
to live through the nine days' wonder.--I want to go away and be a
governess."

"But, my dear Cynthia,--how soon Roger will be back,--a tower of
strength!"

"Has not mamma told you I have broken it all off with Roger? I
wrote this morning. I wrote to his father. That letter will reach
to-morrow. I wrote to Roger. If he ever receives that letter, I hope
to be far away by that time; in Russia may be."

"Nonsense. An engagement like yours cannot be broken off, except by
mutual consent. You've only given others a great deal of pain without
freeing yourself. Nor will you wish it in a month's time. When you
come to think calmly, you'll be glad to think of the stay and support
of such a husband as Roger. You have been in fault, and have acted
foolishly at first,--perhaps wrongly afterwards; but you don't want
your husband to think you faultless?"

"Yes, I do," said Cynthia. "At any rate, my lover must think me so.
And it is just because I do not love him even as so light a thing as
I could love, that I feel that I couldn't bear to have to tell him
I'm sorry, and stand before him like a chidden child to be admonished
and forgiven."

"But here you are, just in such a position before me, Cynthia!"

"Yes! but I love you better than Roger; I've often told Molly so. And
I would have told you, if I hadn't expected and hoped to leave you
all before long. I could see if the recollection of it all came up
before your mind; I could see it in your eyes; I should know it by
instinct. I have a fine instinct for reading the thoughts of others
when they refer to me. I almost hate the idea of Roger judging me by
his own standard, which wasn't made for me, and graciously forgiving
me at last."

"Then I do believe it's right for you to break it off," said Mr.
Gibson, almost as if he were thinking to himself. "That poor poor
lad! But it will be best for him too. And he'll get over it. He has a
good strong heart. Poor old Roger!"

For a moment Cynthia's wilful fancy stretched after the object
passing out of her grasp,--Roger's love became for the instant
a treasure; but, again, she knew that in its entirety of high
undoubting esteem, as well as of passionate regard, it would no
longer be hers; and for the flaw which she herself had made she cast
it away, and would none of it. Yet often in after years, when it
was too late, she wondered and strove to penetrate the inscrutable
mystery of "what would have been."

"Still, take till to-morrow before you act upon your decision," said
Mr. Gibson, slowly. "What faults you have fallen into have been mere
girlish faults at first,--leading you into much deceit, I grant."

"Don't give yourself the trouble to define the shades of blackness,"
said Cynthia, bitterly. "I'm not so obtuse but what I know them all
better than any one can tell me. And as for my decision I acted upon
it at once. It may be long before Roger gets my letter,--but I hope
he is sure to get it at last,--and, as I said, I have let his father
know; it won't hurt him! Oh, sir, I think if I had been differently
brought up I shouldn't have had the sore angry heart I have. Now! No,
don't! I don't want reasoning comfort. I can't stand it. I should
always have wanted admiration and worship, and men's good opinion.
Those unkind gossips! To visit Molly with their hard words! Oh, dear!
I think life is very dreary."

She put her head down on her hands; tired out mentally as well as
bodily. So Mr. Gibson thought. He felt as if much speech from him
would only add to her excitement, and make her worse. He left the
room, and called Molly, from where she was sitting, dolefully. "Go
to Cynthia!" he whispered, and Molly went. She took Cynthia into her
arms with gentle power, and laid her head against her own breast, as
if the one had been a mother, and the other a child.

"Oh, my darling!" she murmured. "I do so love you, dear, dear
Cynthia!" and she stroked her hair, and kissed her eyelids; Cynthia
passive all the while, till suddenly she started up stung with a new
idea, and looking Molly straight in the face, she said,--

"Molly, Roger will marry you! See if it isn't so! You two good--"

But Molly pushed her away with a sudden violence of repulsion.
"Don't!" she said. She was crimson with shame and indignation. "Your
husband this morning! Mine to-night! What do you take him for?"

"A man!" smiled Cynthia. "And therefore, if you won't let me call
him changeable, I'll coin a word and call him consolable!" But Molly
gave her back no answering smile. At this moment, the servant Maria
entered the consulting-room, where the two girls were. She had a
scared look.

"Isn't master here?" asked she, as if she distrusted her eyes.

"No!" said Cynthia. "I heard him go out. I heard him shut the front
door not five minutes ago."

"Oh, dear!" said Maria. "And there's a man come on horseback from
Hamley Hall, and he says as Mr. Osborne is dead, and that master must
go off to the Squire straight away."

"Osborne Hamley dead!" said Cynthia, in awed surprise. Molly was out
at the front door, seeking the messenger through the dusk, round into
the stable-yard, where the groom sate motionless on his dark horse,
flecked with foam, made visible by the lantern placed on the steps
near, where it had been left by the servants, who were dismayed at
this news of the handsome young man who had frequented their master's
house, so full of sportive elegance and winsomeness. Molly went up to
the man, whose thoughts were lost in recollection of the scene he had
left at the place he had come from.

She laid her hand on the hot damp skin of the horse's shoulder; the
man started.

"Is the doctor coming, Miss?" For he saw who it was by the dim light.

"He is dead, is he not?" asked Molly, in a low voice.

"I'm afeard he is,--leastways, there's no doubt according to what
they said. But I've ridden hard! there may be a chance. Is the doctor
coming, Miss?"

"He is gone out. They are seeking him, I believe. I will go myself.
Oh! the poor old Squire!" She went into the kitchen--went over the
house with swift rapidity to gain news of her father's whereabouts.
The servants knew no more than she did. Neither she nor they had
heard what Cynthia, ever quick of perception, had done. The shutting
of the front door had fallen on deaf ears, as far as others were
concerned. Upstairs sped Molly to the drawing-room, where Mrs. Gibson
stood at the door, listening to the unusual stir in the house.

"What is it, Molly? Why, how white you look, child!"

"Where's papa?"

"Gone out. What's the matter?"

"Where?"

"How should I know? I was asleep; Jenny came upstairs on her way to
the bedrooms; she's a girl who never keeps to her work and Maria
takes advantage of her."

"Jenny, Jenny!" cried Molly, frantic at the delay.

"Don't shout, dear,--ring the bell. What can be the matter?"

"Oh, Jenny!" said Molly, half-way up the stairs to meet her, "who
wanted papa?"

Cynthia came to join the group; she too had been looking for traces
or tidings of Mr. Gibson.

"What is the matter?" said Mrs. Gibson. "Can nobody speak and answer
a question?"

"Osborne Hamley is dead!" said Cynthia, gravely.

"Dead! Osborne! Poor fellow! I knew it would be so, though,--I was
sure of it. But Mr. Gibson can do nothing if he's dead. Poor young
man! I wonder where Roger is now? He ought to come home."

Jenny had been blamed for coming into the drawing-room instead
of Maria, whose place it was, and so had lost the few wits she
had. To Molly's hurried questions her replies had been entirely
unsatisfactory. A man had come to the back door--she could not
see who it was--she had not asked his name: he wanted to speak to
master,--master had seemed in a hurry, and only stopped to get his
hat.

"He will not be long away," thought Molly, "or he would have left
word where he was going. But oh! the poor father all alone!" And then
a thought came into her head, which she acted upon straight. "Go to
James, tell him to put the side-saddle I had in November on Nora
Creina. Don't cry, Jenny. There's no time for that. No one is angry
with you. Run!"

So down into the cluster of collected women Molly came, equipped in
her jacket and skirt; quick determination in her eyes; controlled
quivering about the corners of her mouth.

"Why, what in the world," said Mrs. Gibson--"Molly, what are you
thinking about?" But Cynthia had understood it at a glance, and was
arranging Molly's hastily assumed dress, as she passed along.

"I am going. I must go. I cannot bear to think of him alone. When
papa comes back he is sure to go to Hamley, and if I am not wanted, I
can come back with him." She heard Mrs. Gibson's voice following her
in remonstrance, but she did not stay for words. She had to wait in
the stable-yard, and she wondered how the messenger could bear to eat
and drink the food and beer brought out to him by the servants. Her
coming out had evidently interrupted the eager talk,--the questions
and answers passing sharp to and fro; but she caught the words, "all
amongst the tangled grass," and "the Squire would let none on us
touch him: he took him up as if he was a baby; he had to rest many
a time, and once he sate him down on the ground; but still he kept
him in his arms; but we thought we should ne'er have gotten him up
again--him and the body."

"The body!"

Molly had never felt that Osborne was really dead till she heard
those words. They rode quick under the shadows of the hedgerow trees,
but when they slackened speed, to go up a brow, or to give their
horses breath, Molly heard those two little words again in her ears;
and said them over again to herself, in hopes of forcing the sharp
truth into her unwilling sense. But when they came in sight of the
square stillness of the house, shining in the moonlight--the moon had
risen by this time--Molly caught at her breath, and for an instant
she thought she never could go in, and face the presence in that
dwelling. One yellow light burnt steadily, spotting the silver
shining with its earthly coarseness. The man pointed it out: it was
almost the first word he had spoken since they had left Hollingford.

"It's the old nursery. They carried him there. The Squire broke down
at the stair-foot, and they took him to the readiest place. I'll be
bound for it the Squire is there hisself, and old Robin too. They
fetched him, as a knowledgable man among dumb beasts, till th'
regular doctor came."

Molly dropped down from her seat before the man could dismount to
help her. She gathered up her skirts and did not stay again to think
of what was before her. She ran along the once familiar turns, and
swiftly up the stairs, and through the doors, till she came to the
last; then she stopped and listened. It was a deathly silence. She
opened the door:--the Squire was sitting alone at the side of the
bed, holding the dead man's hand, and looking straight before him
at vacancy. He did not stir or move, even so much as an eyelid, at
Molly's entrance. The truth had entered his soul before this, and
he knew that no doctor, be he ever so cunning, could, with all his
striving, put the breath into that body again. Molly came up to him
with the softest steps, the most hushed breath that ever she could.
She did not speak, for she did not know what to say. She felt that he
had no more hope from earthly skill, so what was the use of speaking
of her father and the delay in his coming? After a moment's pause,
standing by the old man's side, she slipped down to the floor, and
sat at his feet. Possibly her presence might have some balm in it;
but uttering of words was as a vain thing. He must have been aware
of her being there, but he took no apparent notice. There they sate,
silent and still, he in his chair, she on the floor; the dead man,
beneath the sheet, for a third. She fancied that she must have
disturbed the father in his contemplation of the quiet face, now more
than half, but not fully, covered up out of sight. Time had never
seemed so without measure, silence had never seemed so noiseless as
it did to Molly, sitting there. In the acuteness of her senses she
heard a step mounting a distant staircase, coming slowly, coming
nearer. She knew it not to be her father's, and that was all she
cared about. Nearer and nearer--close to the outside of the door--a
pause, and a soft hesitating tap. The great gaunt figure sitting by
her side quivered at the sound. Molly rose and went to the door: it
was Robinson, the old butler, holding in his hand a covered basin of
soup.

"God bless you, Miss," said he; "make him touch a drop o' this: he's
gone since breakfast without food, and it's past one in the morning
now."

He softly removed the cover, and Molly took the basin back with her
to her place at the Squire's side. She did not speak, for she did not
well know what to say, or how to present this homely want of nature
before one so rapt in grief. But she put a spoonful to his lips, and
touched them with the savoury food, as if he had been a sick child,
and she the nurse; and instinctively he took down the first spoonful
of the soup. But in a minute he said, with a sort of cry, and almost
overturning the basin Molly held, by his passionate gesture as he
pointed to the bed,--

"He will never eat again--never."

Then he threw himself across the corpse, and wept in such a terrible
manner that Molly trembled lest he also should die--should break his
heart there and then. He took no more notice of her words, of her
tears, of her presence, than he did of that of the moon, looking
through the unclosed window, with passionless stare. Her father stood
by them both before either of them was aware.

"Go downstairs, Molly," said he gravely; but he stroked her head
tenderly as she rose. "Go into the dining-room." Now she felt the
reaction from all her self-control. She trembled with fear as she
went along the moonlit passages. It seemed to her as if she should
meet Osborne, and hear it all explained; how he came to die,--what he
now felt and thought and wished her to do. She did get down to the
dining-room,--the last few steps with a rush of terror,--senseless
terror of what might be behind her; and there she found supper laid
out, and candles lit, and Robinson bustling about decanting some
wine. She wanted to cry; to get into some quiet place, and weep away
her over-excitement; but she could hardly do so there. She only felt
very much tired, and to care for nothing in this world any more. But
vividness of life came back when she found Robinson holding a glass
to her lips as she sat in the great leather easy-chair, to which she
had gone instinctively as to a place of rest.

"Drink, Miss. It's good old Madeira. Your papa said as how you was to
eat a bit. Says he, 'My daughter may have to stay here, Mr. Robinson,
and she's young for the work. Persuade her to eat something, or
she'll break down utterly.' Those was his very words."

Molly did not say anything. She had not energy enough for resistance.
She drank and she ate at the old servant's bidding; and then she
asked him to leave her alone, and went back to her easy-chair and let
herself cry, and so ease her heart.




CHAPTER LII.

SQUIRE HAMLEY'S SORROW.


It seemed very long before Mr. Gibson came down. He went and stood
with his back to the empty fireplace, and did not speak for a minute
or two.

"He's gone to bed," said he at length. "Robinson and I have got him
there. But just as I was leaving him he called me back and asked
me to let you stop. I'm sure I don't know--but one doesn't like to
refuse at such a time."

"I wish to stay," said Molly.

"Do you? There's a good girl. But how will you manage?"

"Oh, never mind that. I can manage. Papa,"--she paused--"what did
Osborne die of?" She asked the question in a low, awe-stricken voice.

"Something wrong about the heart. You wouldn't understand if I told
you. I apprehended it for some time; but it's better not to talk
of such things at home. When I saw him on Thursday week, he seemed
better than I've seen him for a long time. I told Dr. Nicholls so.
But one never can calculate in these complaints."

"You saw him on Thursday week? Why, you never mentioned it!" said
Molly.

"No. I don't talk of my patients at home. Besides, I didn't want him
to consider me as his doctor, but as a friend. Any alarm about his
own health would only have hastened the catastrophe."

"Then didn't he know that he was ill--ill of a dangerous complaint,
I mean: one that might end as it has done?"

"No; certainly not. He would only have been watching his
symptoms--accelerating matters, in fact."

"Oh, papa!" said Molly, shocked.

"I've no time to go into the question," Mr. Gibson continued. "And
until you know what has to be said on both sides and in every
instance, you are not qualified to judge. We must keep our attention
on the duties in hand now. You sleep here for the remainder of the
night, which is more than half-gone already?"

"Yes."

"Promise me to go to bed just as usual. You may not think it, but
most likely you'll go to sleep at once. People do at your age."

"Papa, I think I ought to tell you something. I know a great secret
of Osborne's, which I promised solemnly not to tell; but the last
time I saw him I think he must have been afraid of something like
this." A fit of sobbing came upon her, which her father was afraid
would end in hysterics. But suddenly she mastered herself, and looked
up into his anxious face, and smiled to reassure him.

"I could not help it, papa!"

"No. I know. Go on with what you were saying. You ought to be in bed;
but if you've a secret on your mind you won't sleep."

"Osborne was married," said she, fixing her eyes on her father. "That
is the secret."

"Married! Nonsense. What makes you think so?"

"He told me. That's to say, I was in the library--was reading there,
some time ago; and Roger came and spoke to Osborne about his wife.
Roger did not see me, but Osborne did. They made me promise secrecy.
I don't think I did wrong."

"Don't worry yourself about right or wrong just now; tell me more
about it, at once."

"I knew no more till six months ago--last November, when you went up
to Lady Cumnor. Then he called, and gave me his wife's address, but
still under promise of secrecy; and, except those two times, and once
when Roger just alluded to it, I have never heard any one mention the
subject. I think he would have told me more that last time, only Miss
Phoebe came in."

"Where is this wife of his?"

"Down in the south; near Winchester, I think. He said she was a
Frenchwoman and a Roman Catholic; and I think he said she was a
servant," added Molly.

"Phew!" Her father made a long whistle of dismay.

"And," continued Molly, "he spoke of a child. Now you know as much as
I do, papa, except the address. I have it written down safe at home."

Forgetting, apparently, what time of night it was, Mr. Gibson sate
down, stretched out his legs before him, put his hands in his
pockets, and began to think. Molly sate still without speaking, too
tired to do more than wait.

"Well!" said he at last, jumping up, "nothing can be done to-night;
by to-morrow morning, perhaps, I may find out. Poor little pale
face!"--taking it between both his hands and kissing it; "poor,
sweet, little pale face!" Then he rang the bell, and told Robinson to
send some maid-servant to take Miss Gibson to her room.

"He won't be up early," said he, in parting. "The shock has lowered
him too much to be energetic. Send breakfast up to him in his own
room. I'll be here again before ten."

Late as it was before he left, he kept his word.

"Now, Molly," he said, "you and I must tell him the truth between us.
I don't know how he will take it; it may comfort him, but I've very
little hope: either way, he ought to know it at once."

"Robinson says he has gone into the room again, and he is afraid he
has locked the door on the inside."

"Never mind. I shall ring the bell, and send up Robinson to say that
I am here, and wish to speak to him."

The message returned was, "The Squire's kind love, and could not see
Mr. Gibson just then." Robinson added, "It was a long time before
he'd answer at all, sir."

"Go up again, and tell him I can wait his convenience. Now that's a
lie," Mr. Gibson said, turning round to Molly as soon as Robinson had
left the room. "I ought to be far enough away at twelve; but, if I'm
not much mistaken, the innate habits of a gentleman will make him
uneasy at the idea of keeping me waiting his pleasure, and will do
more to bring him out of that room into this than any entreaties or
reasoning." Mr. Gibson was growing impatient though, before they
heard the Squire's footstep on the stairs; he was evidently coming
slowly and unwillingly. He came in almost like one blind, groping
along, and taking hold of chair or table for support or guidance till
he reached Mr. Gibson. He did not speak when he held the doctor by
the hand; he only hung down his head, and kept on a feeble shaking of
welcome.

"I'm brought very low, sir. I suppose it's God's doing; but it comes
hard upon me. He was my firstborn child." He said this almost as if
speaking to a stranger, and informing him of facts of which he was
ignorant.

"Here's Molly," said Mr. Gibson, choking a little himself, and
pushing her forwards.

"I beg your pardon; I did not see you at first. My mind is a good
deal occupied just now." He sate heavily down, and then seemed almost
to forget they were there. Molly wondered what was to come next.
Suddenly her father spoke,--

"Where's Roger?" said he. "Is he not likely to be soon at the Cape?"
He got up and looked at the directions of one or two unopened letters
brought by that morning's post; among them was one in Cynthia's
handwriting. Both Molly and he saw it at the same time. How long it
was since yesterday! But the Squire took no notice of their
proceedings or their looks.

"You will be glad to have Roger at home as soon as may be, I think,
sir. Some months must elapse first; but I'm sure he will return as
speedily as possible."

The Squire said something in a very low voice. Both father and
daughter strained their ears to hear what it was. They both believed
it to be, "Roger isn't Osborne!" And Mr. Gibson spoke on that belief.
He spoke more quietly than Molly had ever heard him do before.

"No! we know that. I wish that anything that Roger could do, or that
I could do, or that any one could do, would comfort you; but it is
past human comfort."

"I do try to say, God's will be done, sir," said the Squire, looking
up at Mr. Gibson for the first time, and speaking with more life in
his voice; "but it's harder to be resigned than happy people think."
They were all silent for a while. The Squire himself was the first
to speak again,--"He was my first child, sir; my eldest son. And
of late years we weren't"--his voice broke down, but he controlled
himself--"we weren't quite as good friends as could be wished; and
I'm not sure--not sure that he knew how I loved him." And now he
cried aloud with an exceeding bitter cry.

"Better so!" whispered Mr. Gibson to Molly. "When he's a little
calmer, don't be afraid; tell him all you know, exactly as it
happened."

Molly began. Her voice sounded high and unnatural to herself, as if
some one else was speaking, but she made her words clear. The Squire
did not attempt to listen, at first, at any rate.

"One day when I was here, at the time of Mrs. Hamley's last illness"
(the Squire here checked his convulsive breathing), "I was in the
library, and Osborne came in. He said he had only come in for a book,
and that I was not to mind him, so I went on reading. Presently,
Roger came along the flagged garden-path just outside the window
(which was open). He did not see me in the corner where I was
sitting, and said to Osborne, 'Here's a letter from your wife!'"

Now the Squire was all attention; for the first time his tear-swollen
eyes met the eyes of another, and he looked at Molly with searching
anxiety, as he repeated, "His wife! Osborne married!" Molly went on:

"Osborne was angry with Roger for speaking out before me, and they
made me promise never to mention it to any one; or to allude to it to
either of them again. I never named it to papa till last night."

"Go on," said Mr. Gibson. "Tell the Squire about Osborne's call--what
you told me!" Still the Squire hung on her lips, listening with open
mouth and eyes.

"Some months ago Osborne called. He was not well, and wanted to see
papa. Papa was away, and I was alone. I don't exactly remember how
it came about, but he spoke to me of his wife for the first and only
time since the affair in the library." She looked at her father, as
if questioning him as to the desirableness of telling the few further
particulars that she knew. The Squire's mouth was dry and stiff, but
he tried to say, "Tell me all,--everything." And Molly understood the
half-formed words.

"He said his wife was a good woman, and that he loved her dearly;
but she was a French Roman Catholic, and a"--another glance at her
father--"she had been a servant once. That was all; except that I
have her address at home. He wrote it down and gave it me."

"Well, well!" moaned the Squire. "It's all over now. All over. All
past and gone. We'll not blame him,--no; but I wish he'd ha' told
me; he and I to live together with such a secret in one of us. It's
no wonder to me now--nothing can be a wonder again, for one never
can tell what's in a man's heart. Married so long! and we sitting
together at meals--and living together. Why, I told him everything!
Too much, may be, for I showed him all my passions and ill-tempers!
Married so long! Oh, Osborne, Osborne, you should have told me!"

"Yes, he should!" said Mr. Gibson. "But I daresay he knew how much
you would dislike such a choice as he had made. But he should have
told you!"

"You know nothing about it, sir," said the Squire sharply. "You don't
know the terms we were on. Not hearty or confidential. I was cross
to him many a time; angry with him for being dull, poor lad--and he
with all this weight on his mind. I won't have people interfering and
judging between me and my sons. And Roger too! He could know it all,
and keep it from me!"

"Osborne evidently had bound him down to secrecy, just as he bound
me," said Molly; "Roger could not help himself."

"Osborne was such a fellow for persuading people, and winning them
over," said the Squire, dreamily. "I remember--but what's the use of
remembering? It's all over, and Osborne's dead without opening his
heart to me. I could have been tender to him, I could. But he'll
never know it now!"

"But we can guess what wish he had strongest in his mind at the last,
from what we do know of his life," said Mr. Gibson.

"What, sir?" said the Squire, with sharp suspicion of what was
coming.

"His wife must have been his last thought, must she not?"

"How do I know she was his wife? Do you think he'd go and marry a
French baggage of a servant? It may be all a tale trumped up."

"Stop, Squire. I don't care to defend my daughter's truth or
accuracy. But with the dead man's body lying upstairs--his soul with
God--think twice before you say more hasty words, impugning his
character; if she was not his wife, what was she?"

"I beg your pardon. I hardly know what I'm saying. Did I accuse
Osborne? Oh, my lad, my lad--thou might have trusted thy old dad! He
used to call me his 'old dad' when he was a little chap not bigger
than this," indicating a certain height with his hand. "I never meant
to say he was not--not what one would wish to think him now--his soul
with God, as you say very justly--for I'm sure it is there--"

"Well! but, Squire," said Mr. Gibson, trying to check the other's
rambling, "to return to his wife--"

"And the child," whispered Molly to her father. Low as the whisper
was, it struck on the Squire's ear.

"What?" said he, turning round to her suddenly, "--child? You never
named that? Is there a child? Husband and father, and I never
knew! God bless Osborne's child! I say, God bless it!" He stood up
reverently, and the other two instinctively rose. He closed his hands
as if in momentary prayer. Then exhausted he sate down again, and put
out his hand to Molly.

"You're a good girl. Thank you.--Tell me what I ought to do, and I'll
do it." This to Mr. Gibson.

"I'm almost as much puzzled as you are, Squire," replied he. "I fully
believe the whole story; but I think there must be some written
confirmation of it, which perhaps ought to be found at once, before
we act. Most probably this is to be discovered among Osborne's
papers. Will you look over them at once? Molly shall return with me,
and find the address that Osborne gave her, while you are busy--"

"She'll come back again?" said the Squire eagerly. "You--she won't
leave me to myself?"

"No! She shall come back this evening. I'll manage to send her
somehow. But she has no clothes but the habit she came in, and I want
my horse that she rode away upon."

"Take the carriage," said the Squire. "Take anything. I'll give
orders. You'll come back again, too?"

"No! I'm afraid not, to-day. I'll come to-morrow, early. Molly shall
return this evening, whenever it suits you to send for her."

"This afternoon; the carriage shall be at your house at three. I dare
not look at Osborne's--at the papers without one of you with me; and
yet I shall never rest till I know more."

"I'll send the desk in by Robinson before I leave. And--can you give
me some lunch before I go?"

Little by little he led the Squire to eat a morsel or so of food;
and so, strengthening him physically, and encouraging him mentally,
Mr. Gibson hoped that he would begin his researches during Molly's
absence.

There was something touching in the Squire's wistful looks after
Molly as she moved about. A stranger might have imagined her to
be his daughter instead of Mr. Gibson's. The meek, broken-down,
considerate ways of the bereaved father never showed themselves more
strongly than when he called them back to his chair, out of which
he seemed too languid to rise, and said, as if by an after-thought:
"Give my love to Miss Kirkpatrick; tell her I look upon her as quite
one of the family. I shall be glad to see her after--after the
funeral. I don't think I can before."

"He knows nothing of Cynthia's resolution to give up Roger," said Mr.
Gibson as they rode away. "I had a long talk with her last night, but
she was as resolute as ever. From what your mamma tells me, there is
a third lover in London, whom she's already refused. I'm thankful
that you've no lover at all, Molly, unless that abortive attempt of
Mr. Coxe's at an offer, long ago, can be called a lover."

"I never heard of it, papa!" said Molly.

"Oh, no; I forgot. What a fool I was! Why, don't you remember the
hurry I was in to get you off to Hamley Hall, the very first time you
ever went? It was all because I got hold of a desperate love-letter
from Coxe, addressed to you."

But Molly was too tired to be amused, or even interested. She could
not get over the sight of the straight body covered with a sheet,
which yet let the outlines be seen,--all that remained of Osborne.
Her father had trusted too much to the motion of the ride, and the
change of scene from the darkened house. He saw his mistake.

"Some one must write to Mrs. Osborne Hamley," said he. "I believe her
to have a legal right to the name; but whether or no, she must be
told that the father of her child is dead. Shall you do it, or I?"

"Oh, you, please, papa!"

"I will, if you wish. But she may have heard of you as a friend of
her dead husband's; while of me--a mere country doctor--it's very
probable she has never heard the name."

"If I ought, I will do it." Mr. Gibson did not like this ready
acquiescence, given in so few words, too.

"There's Hollingford church-spire," said she presently, as they drew
near the town, and caught a glimpse of the church through the trees.
"I think I never wish to go out of sight of it again."

"Nonsense!" said he. "Why, you've all your travelling to do yet;
and if these new-fangled railways spread, as they say they will, we
shall all be spinning about the world; 'sitting on tea-kettles,' as
Phoebe Browning calls it. Miss Browning wrote such a capital letter
of advice to Miss Hornblower. I heard of it at the Millers'. Miss
Hornblower was going to travel by railroad for the first time; and
Dorothy was very anxious, and sent her directions for her conduct;
one piece of advice was not to sit on the boiler."

Molly laughed a little, as she was expected to do. "Here we are at
home, at last."

Mrs. Gibson gave Molly a warm welcome. For one thing, Cynthia was
in disgrace; for another, Molly came from the centre of news; for a
third, Mrs. Gibson was really fond of the girl, in her way, and sorry
to see her pale heavy looks.

"To think of it all being so sudden at last! Not but what I always
expected it! And so provoking! Just when Cynthia had given up Roger!
If she had only waited a day! What does the Squire say to it all?"

"He is beaten down with grief," replied Molly.

"Indeed! I should not have fancied he had liked the engagement so
much."

"What engagement?"

"Why, Roger to Cynthia, to be sure. I asked you how the Squire took
her letter, announcing the breaking of it off?"

"Oh--I made a mistake. He hasn't opened his letters to-day. I saw
Cynthia's among them."

"Now that I call positive disrespect."

"I don't know. He did not mean it for such. Where is Cynthia?"

"Gone out into the meadow-garden. She'll be in directly. I wanted
her to do some errands for me, but she flatly refused to go into the
town. I am afraid she mismanages her affairs badly. But she won't
allow me to interfere. I hate to look at such things in a mercenary
spirit, but it is provoking to see her throw over two such good
matches. First Mr. Henderson, and now Roger Hamley. When does the
Squire expect Roger? Does he think he will come back sooner for poor
dear Osborne's death?"

"I don't know. He hardly seems to think of anything but Osborne. He
appears to me to have almost forgotten every one else. But perhaps
the news of Osborne's being married, and of the child, may rouse him
up."

Molly had no doubt that Osborne was really and truly married, nor
had she any idea that her father had never breathed the facts of
which she had told him on the previous night, to his wife or Cynthia.
But Mr. Gibson had been slightly dubious of the full legality of
the marriage, and had not felt inclined to speak of it to his wife
until that had been ascertained one way or another. So Mrs. Gibson
exclaimed, "What _do_ you mean, child? Married! Osborne married! Who
says so?"

"Oh, dear! I suppose I ought not to have named it. I'm very stupid
to-day. Yes! Osborne has been married a long time; but the Squire did
not know of it until this morning. I think it has done him good. But
I don't know."

"Who is the lady? Why, I call it a shame to go about as a single man,
and be married all the time! If there is one thing that revolts me,
it is duplicity. Who is the lady? Do tell me all you know about it,
there's a dear."

"She is French, and a Roman Catholic," said Molly.

"French! They are such beguiling women; and he was so much abroad!
You said there was a child,--is it a boy or a girl?"

"I did not hear. I did not ask."

Molly did not think it necessary to do more than answer questions;
indeed, she was vexed enough to have told anything of what her father
evidently considered it desirable to keep secret. Just then Cynthia
came wandering into the room with a careless, hopeless look in her
face, which Molly noticed at once. She had not heard of Molly's
arrival, and had no idea that she was returned until she saw her
sitting there.

"Molly, darling! Is that you? You're as welcome as the flowers in
May, though you've not been gone twenty-four hours. But the house
isn't the same when you are away!"

"And she brings us such news too!" said Mrs. Gibson. "I'm really
almost glad you wrote to the Squire yesterday, for if you had waited
till to-day--I thought you were in too great a hurry at the time--he
might have thought you had some interested reason for giving up your
engagement. Osborne Hamley was married all this time unknown to
everybody, and has got a child too."

"Osborne married!" exclaimed Cynthia. "If ever a man looked a
bachelor, he did. Poor Osborne! with his fair delicate elegance,--he
looked so young and boyish!"

"Yes! it was a great piece of deceit, and I can't easily forgive
him for it. Only think! If he had paid either of you any particular
attention, and you had fallen in love with him! Why, he might have
broken your heart, or Molly's either. I can't forgive him, even
though he is dead, poor fellow!"

"Well, as he never did pay either of us any particular attention, and
as we neither of us did fall in love with him, I think I only feel
sorry that he had all the trouble and worry of concealment." Cynthia
spoke with a pretty keen recollection of how much trouble and worry
her concealment had cost her.

"And now of course it is a son, and will be the heir, and Roger will
just be as poorly off as ever. I hope you'll take care and let the
Squire know Cynthia was quite ignorant of these new facts that have
come out when she wrote those letters, Molly? I should not like a
suspicion of worldliness to rest upon any one with whom I had any
concern."

"He hasn't read Cynthia's letter yet. Oh, do let me bring it home
unopened," said Molly. "Send another letter to Roger--now--at once;
it will reach him at the same time; he will get both when he arrives
at the Cape, and make him understand which is the last--the real one.
Think! he will hear of Osborne's death at the same time--two such sad
things! Do, Cynthia!"

"No, my dear," said Mrs. Gibson. "I could not allow that, even if
Cynthia felt inclined for it. Asking to be re-engaged to him! At
any rate, she must wait now until he proposes again, and we see how
things turn out."

But Molly kept her pleading eyes fixed on Cynthia.

"No!" said Cynthia firmly, but not without consideration. "It cannot
be. I've felt more content this last night than I've done for weeks
past. I'm glad to be free. I dreaded Roger's goodness, and learning,
and all that. It was not in my way, and I don't believe I should
have ever married him, even without knowing of all these ill-natured
stories that are circulating about me, and which he would hear of,
and expect me to explain, and be sorry for, and penitent and humble.
I know he could not have made me happy, and I don't believe he would
have been happy with me. It must stay as it is. I would rather be a
governess than married to him. I should get weary of him every day of
my life."

"Weary of Roger!" said Molly to herself. "It is best as it is, I
see," she answered aloud. "Only I'm very sorry for him, very. He did
love you so. You will never get any one to love you like him!"

"Very well. I must take my chance. And too much love is rather
oppressive to me, I believe. I like a great deal, widely spread
about; not all confined to one individual lover."

"I don't believe you," said Molly. "But don't let us talk any more
about it. It is best as it is. I thought--I almost felt sure you
would be sorry this morning. But we will leave it alone now." She
sate silently looking out of the window, her heart sorely stirred,
she scarcely knew how or why. But she could not have spoken. Most
likely she would have begun to cry if she had spoken. Cynthia stole
softly up to her after a while.

"You are vexed with me, Molly," she began in a low voice. But Molly
turned sharply round:

"I! I have no business at all in the affair. It is for you to judge.
Do what you think right. I believe you have done right. Only I don't
want to discuss it, and paw it over with talk. I'm very much tired,
dear"--gently now she spoke--"and I hardly know what I say. If I
speak crossly, don't mind it." Cynthia did not reply at once. Then
she said,--

"Do you think I might go with you, and help you? I might have done
yesterday; and you say he hasn't opened my letter, so he has not
heard as yet. And I was always fond of poor Osborne, in my way, you
know."

"I cannot tell; I have no right to say," replied Molly, scarcely
understanding Cynthia's motives, which, after all, were only impulses
in this case. "Papa would be able to judge; I think, perhaps, you had
better not. But don't go by my opinion; I can only tell what I should
wish to do in your place."

"It was as much for your sake as any one's, Molly," said Cynthia.

"Oh, then, don't! I am tired to-day with sitting up; but to-morrow
I shall be all right; and I should not like it, if, for my sake, you
came into the house at so solemn a time."

"Very well!" said Cynthia, half-glad that her impulsive offer was
declined; for, as she said, thinking to herself, "It would have
been awkward after all." So Molly went back in the carriage alone,
wondering how she should find the Squire; wondering what discoveries
he had made among Osborne's papers, and at what conviction he would
have arrived.




CHAPTER LIII.

UNLOOKED-FOR ARRIVALS.


Robinson opened the door for Molly almost before the carriage had
fairly drawn up at the Hall, and told her that the Squire had been
very anxious for her return, and had more than once sent him to
an upstairs window, from which a glimpse of the hill-road between
Hollingford and Hamley could be caught, to know if the carriage was
not yet in sight. Molly went into the drawing-room. The Squire was
standing in the middle of the floor awaiting her--in fact, longing to
go out and meet her, but restrained by a feeling of solemn etiquette,
which prevented his moving about as usual in that house of mourning.
He held a paper in his hands, which were trembling with excitement
and emotion; and four or five open letters were strewed on a table
near him.

"It's all true," he began; "she's his wife, and he's her husband--was
her husband--that's the word for it--was! Poor lad! poor lad! it's
cost him a deal. Pray God, it wasn't my fault. Read this, my dear.
It's a certificate. It's all regular--Osborne Hamley to Marie-AimÄe
Scherer,--parish-church and all, and witnessed. Oh, dear!" He sate
down in the nearest chair and groaned. Molly took a seat by him, and
read the legal paper, the perusal of which was not needed to convince
her of the fact of the marriage. She held it in her hand after she
had finished reading it, waiting for the Squire's next coherent
words; for he kept talking to himself in broken sentences. "Ay,
ay! that comes o' temper, and crabbedness. She was the only one as
could,--and I've been worse since she was gone. Worse! worse! and
see what it has come to! He was afraid of me--ay--afraid. That's the
truth of it--afraid. And it made him keep all to himself, and care
killed him. They may call it heart-disease--O my lad, my lad, I know
better now; but it's too late--that's the sting of it--too late, too
late!" He covered his face, and moved himself backward and forward
till Molly could bear it no longer.

"There are some letters," said she: "may I read any of them?" At
another time she would not have asked; but she was driven to it now
by her impatience of the speechless grief of the old man.

"Ay, read 'em, read 'em," said he. "Maybe you can. I can only pick
out a word here and there. I put 'em there for you to look at; and
tell me what is in 'em."

Molly's knowledge of written French of the present day was not so
great as her knowledge of the French of the _MÄmoires de Sully_, and
neither the spelling nor the writing of the letters was of the best;
but she managed to translate into good enough colloquial English some
innocent sentences of love, and submission to Osborne's will--as if
his judgment was infallible,--and of faith in his purposes,--little
sentences in "little language" that went home to the Squire's heart.
Perhaps if Molly had read French more easily she might not have
translated them into such touching, homely, broken words. Here and
there, there were expressions in English; these the hungry-hearted
Squire had read while waiting for Molly's return. Every time she
stopped, he said, "Go on." He kept his face shaded, and only repeated
those two words at every pause. She got up to find some more of
AimÄe's letters. In examining the papers, she came upon one in
particular. "Have you seen this, sir? This certificate of baptism"
(reading aloud) "of Roger Stephen Osborne Hamley, born June 21,
183--, child of Osborne Hamley and Marie-AimÄe his wife--"

"Give it me," said the Squire, his voice breaking now, and stretching
forth his eager hand. "'Roger,' that's me, 'Stephen,' that's my poor
old father: he died when he was not so old as I am; but I've always
thought on him as very old. He was main and fond of Osborne, when he
was quite a little one. It's good of the lad to have thought on my
father Stephen. Ay! that was his name. And Osborne--Osborne Hamley!
One Osborne Hamley lies dead on his bed--and t'other--t'other I've
never seen, and never heard on till to-day. He must be called
Osborne, Molly. There is a Roger--there's two for that matter; but
one is a good-for-nothing old man; and there's never an Osborne any
more, unless this little thing is called Osborne; we'll have him
here, and get a nurse for him; and make his mother comfortable for
life in her own country. I'll keep this, Molly. You're a good lass
for finding it. Osborne Hamley! And if God will give me grace, he
shall never hear a cross word from me--never! He shan't be afeard of
me. Oh, _my_ Osborne, _my_ Osborne" (he burst out), "do you know now
how bitter and sore is my heart for every hard word as I ever spoke
to you? Do you know now how I loved you--my boy--my boy?"

From the general tone of the letters, Molly doubted if the mother
would consent, so easily as the Squire seemed to expect, to be parted
from her child; the letters were not very wise, perhaps (though of
this Molly never thought), but a heart full of love spoke tender
words in every line. Still, it was not for Molly to talk of this
doubt of hers just then; but rather to dwell on the probable graces
and charms of the little Roger Stephen Osborne Hamley. She let
the Squire exhaust himself in wondering as to the particulars of
every event, helping him out in conjectures; and both of them, from
their imperfect knowledge of possibilities, made the most curious,
fantastic, and improbable guesses at the truth. And so that day
passed over, and the night came.

There were not many people who had any claim to be invited to the
funeral, and of these Mr. Gibson and the Squire's hereditary man of
business had taken charge. But when Mr. Gibson came, early on the
following morning, Molly referred the question to him, which had
suggested itself to her mind, though apparently not to the Squire's,
what intimation of her loss should be sent to the widow, living
solitary near Winchester, watching and waiting, if not for his coming
who lay dead in his distant home, at least for his letters. One from
her had already come, in her foreign handwriting, to the post-office
to which all her communications were usually sent, but of course they
at the Hall knew nothing of this.

"She must be told," said Mr. Gibson, musing.

"Yes, she must," replied his daughter. "But how?"

"A day or two of waiting will do no harm," said he, almost as if
he was anxious to delay the solution of the problem. "It will make
her anxious, poor thing, and all sorts of gloomy possibilities will
suggest themselves to her mind--amongst them the truth; it will be a
kind of preparation."

"For what? Something must be done at last," said Molly.

"Yes; true. Suppose you write, and say he's very ill; write
to-morrow. I daresay they've indulged themselves in daily postage,
and then she'll have had three days' silence. You say how you come
to know all you do about it; I think she ought to know he is very
ill--in great danger, if you like: and you can follow it up next day
with the full truth. I wouldn't worry the Squire about it. After the
funeral we will have a talk about the child."

"She will never part with it," said Molly.

"Whew! Till I see the woman I can't tell," said her father; "some
women would. It will be well provided for, according to what you say.
And she is a foreigner, and may very likely wish to go back to her
own people and kindred. There's much to be said on both sides."

"So you always say, papa. But in this case I think you'll find I'm
right. I judge from her letters; but I think I'm right."

"So you always say, daughter. Time will show. So the child is a
boy? Mrs. Gibson told me particularly to ask. It will go far to
reconciling her to Cynthia's dismissal of Roger. But indeed it is
quite as well for both of them, though of course he will be a long
time before he thinks so. They were not suited to each other. Poor
Roger! It was hard work writing to him yesterday; and who knows what
may have become of him! Well, well! one has to get through the world
somehow. I'm glad, however, this little lad has turned up to be the
heir. I shouldn't have liked the property to go to the Irish Hamleys,
who are the next heirs, as Osborne once told me. Now write that
letter, Molly, to the poor little Frenchwoman out yonder. It will
prepare her for it; and we must think a bit how to spare her the
shock, for Osborne's sake."

The writing this letter was rather difficult work for Molly, and
she tore up two or three copies before she could manage it to her
satisfaction; and at last, in despair of ever doing it better, she
sent it off without re-reading it. The next day was easier; the fact
of Osborne's death was told briefly and tenderly. But when this
second letter was sent off, Molly's heart began to bleed for the
poor creature, bereft of her husband, in a foreign land, and he at a
distance from her, dead and buried without her ever having had the
chance of printing his dear features on her memory by one last long
lingering look. With her thoughts full of the unknown AimÄe, Molly
talked much about her that day to the Squire. He would listen for
ever to any conjecture, however wild, about the grandchild, but
perpetually winced away from all discourse about "the Frenchwoman,"
as he called her; not unkindly, but to his mind she was simply the
Frenchwoman--chattering, dark-eyed, demonstrative, and possibly even
rouged. He would treat her with respect as his son's widow, and
would try even not to think upon the female inveiglement in which he
believed. He would make her an allowance to the extent of his duty:
but he hoped and trusted he might never be called upon to see her.
His solicitor, Gibson, anybody and everybody, should be called upon
to form a phalanx of defence against that danger.

And all this time a little young grey-eyed woman was making her
way,--not towards him, but towards the dead son, whom as yet she
believed to be her living husband. She knew she was acting in
defiance of his expressed wish; but he had never dismayed her with
any expression of his own fears about his health; and she, bright
with life, had never contemplated death coming to fetch away one so
beloved. He was ill--very ill, the letter from the strange girl said
that; but AimÄe had nursed her parents, and knew what illness was.
The French doctor had praised her skill and neat-handedness as a
nurse, and even if she had been the clumsiest of women, was he not
her husband--her all? And was she not his wife, whose place was by
his pillow? So, without even as much reasoning as has been here
given, AimÄe made her preparations, swallowing down the tears that
would overflow her eyes, and drop into the little trunk she was
packing so neatly. And by her side, on the ground, sate the child,
now nearly two years old; and for him AimÄe had always a smile and a
cheerful word. Her servant loved her and trusted her; and the woman
was of an age to have had experience of humankind. AimÄe had told
her that her husband was ill, and the servant had known enough of
the household history to be aware that as yet AimÄe was not his
acknowledged wife. But she sympathized with the prompt decision of
her mistress to go to him directly, wherever he was. Caution comes
from education of one kind or another, and AimÄe was not dismayed by
warnings; only the woman pleaded hard for the child to be left. "He
was such company," she said; "and he would so tire his mother in her
journeyings; and maybe his father would be too ill to see him." To
which AimÄe replied, "Good company for you, but better for me. A
woman is never tired with carrying her own child" (which was not
true; but there was sufficient truth in it to make it believed by
both mistress and servant), "and if Monsieur could care for anything,
he would rejoice to hear the babble of his little son." So AimÄe
caught the evening coach to London at the nearest cross-road, Martha
standing by as chaperon and friend to see her off, and handing her
in the large lusty child, already crowing with delight at the sight
of the horses. There was a "lingerie" shop, kept by a Frenchwoman,
whose acquaintance AimÄe had made in the days when she was a London
nursemaid, and thither she betook herself, rather than to an hotel,
to spend the few night-hours that intervened before the Birmingham
coach started at early morning. She slept or watched on a sofa in
the parlour, for spare-bed there was none; but Madame Pauline came
in betimes with a good cup of coffee for the mother, and of "soupe
blanche" for the boy; and they went off again into the wide world,
only thinking of, only seeking the "him," who was everything human
to both. AimÄe remembered the sound of the name of the village where
Osborne had often told her that he alighted from the coach to walk
home; and though she could never have spelt the strange uncouth word,
yet she spoke it with pretty slow distinctness to the guard, asking
him in her broken English when they should arrive there? Not till
four o'clock. Alas! and what might happen before then! Once with him
she would have no fear; she was sure that she could bring him round;
but what might not happen before he was in her tender care? She was
a very capable person in many ways, though so childish and innocent
in others. She made up her mind to the course she should pursue when
the coach set her down at Feversham. She asked for a man to carry her
trunk, and show her the way to Hamley Hall.

"Hamley Hall!" said the innkeeper. "Eh! there's a deal o' trouble
there just now."

"I know, I know," said she, hastening off after the wheelbarrow in
which her trunk was going, and breathlessly struggling to keep up
with it, her heavy child asleep in her arms. Her pulses beat all over
her body; she could hardly see out of her eyes. To her, a foreigner,
the drawn blinds of the house, when she came in sight of it, had no
significance; she hurried, stumbled on.

"Back door or front, missus?" asked the boots from the inn.

"The most nearest," said she. And the front door was "the most
nearest." Molly was sitting with the Squire in the darkened
drawing-room, reading out her translations of AimÄe's letters to her
husband. The Squire was never weary of hearing them; the very sound
of Molly's voice soothed and comforted him, it was so sweet and low.
And he pulled her up, much as a child does, if on a second reading of
the same letter she substituted one word for another. The house was
very still this afternoon,--still as it had been now for several
days; every servant in it, however needlessly, moving about on
tiptoe, speaking below the breath, and shutting doors as softly
as might be. The nearest noise or stir of active life was that of
the rooks in the trees, who were beginning their spring chatter of
business. Suddenly, through this quiet, there came a ring at the
front-door bell that sounded, and went on sounding, through the
house, pulled by an ignorant vigorous hand. Molly stopped reading;
she and the Squire looked at each other in surprised dismay. Perhaps
a thought of Roger's sudden (and impossible) return was in the mind
of each; but neither spoke. They heard Robinson hurrying to answer
the unwonted summons. They listened; but they heard no more. There
was little more to hear. When the old servant opened the door,
a lady with a child in her arms stood there. She gasped out her
ready-prepared English sentence,--

"Can I see Mr. Osborne Hamley? He is ill, I know; but I am his wife."

Robinson had been aware that there was some mystery, long suspected
by the servants, and come to light at last to the master,--he had
guessed that there was a young woman in the case; but when she stood
there before him, asking for her dead husband as if he were living,
any presence of mind Robinson might have had forsook him; he could
not tell her the truth,--he could only leave the door open, and say
to her, "Wait awhile, I'll come back," and betake himself to the
drawing-room where Molly was, he knew. He went up to her in a flutter
and a hurry, and whispered something to her which turned her white
with dismay.

"What is it? What is it?" said the Squire, trembling with excitement.
"Don't keep it from me. I can bear it. Roger--"

They both thought he was going to faint; he had risen up and come
close to Molly; suspense would be worse than anything.

"Mrs. Osborne Hamley is here," said Molly. "I wrote to tell her her
husband was very ill, and she has come."

"She does not know what has happened, seemingly," said Robinson.

"I can't see her--I can't see her," said the Squire, shrinking away
into a corner. "You will go, Molly, won't you? You'll go."

Molly stood for a moment or two, irresolute. She, too, shrank from
the interview. Robinson put in his word: "She looks but a weakly
thing, and has carried a big baby, choose how far, I didn't stop to
ask."

At this instant the door softly opened, and right into the midst of
them came the little figure in grey, looking ready to fall with the
weight of her child.

"You are Molly," said she, not seeing the Squire at once. "The lady
who wrote the letter; he spoke of you sometimes. You will let me go
to him."

Molly did not answer, except that at such moments the eyes speak
solemnly and comprehensively. AimÄe read their meaning. All she said
was,--"He is not--oh, my husband--my husband!" Her arms relaxed, her
figure swayed, the child screamed and held out his arms for help.
That help was given him by his grandfather, just before AimÄe fell
senseless on the floor.

"Maman, maman!" cried the little fellow, now striving and fighting to
get back to her, where she lay; he fought so lustily that the Squire
had to put him down, and he crawled to the poor inanimate body,
behind which sat Molly, holding the head; whilst Robinson rushed away
for water, wine, and more womankind.


[Illustration: "MAMAN, MAMAN!"]


"Poor thing, poor thing!" said the Squire, bending over her, and
crying afresh over her suffering. "She is but young, Molly, and she
must ha' loved him dearly."

"To be sure!" said Molly, quickly. She was untying the bonnet, and
taking off the worn, but neatly mended gloves; there was the soft
luxuriant black hair, shading the pale, innocent face,--the little
notable-looking brown hands, with the wedding-ring for sole ornament.
The child clustered his fingers round one of hers, and nestled up
against her with his plaintive cry, getting more and more into a
burst of wailing: "Maman, maman!" At the growing acuteness of his
imploring, her hand moved, her lips quivered, consciousness came
partially back. She did not open her eyes, but great heavy tears
stole out from beneath her eyelashes. Molly held her head against
her own breast; and they tried to give her wine,--which she shrank
from--water, which she did not reject; that was all. At last she
tried to speak. "Take me away," she said, "into the dark. Leave me
alone."

So Molly and the woman lifted her up and carried her away, and laid
her on the bed, in the best bed-chamber in the house, and darkened
the already shaded light. She was like an unconscious corpse herself,
in that she offered neither assistance nor resistance to all that
they were doing. But just before Molly was leaving the room to take
up her watch outside the door, she felt rather than heard that AimÄe
spoke to her.

"Food--bread and milk for baby." But when they brought her food
herself, she only shrank away and turned her face to the wall without
a word. In the hurry, the child had been left with Robinson and
the Squire. For some unknown, but most fortunate reason, he took a
dislike to Robinson's red face and hoarse voice, and showed a most
decided preference for his grandfather. When Molly came down she
found the Squire feeding the child, with more of peace upon his face
than there had been for all these days. The boy was every now and
then leaving off taking his bread and milk to show his dislike to
Robinson by word and gesture: a proceeding which only amused the old
servant, while it highly delighted the more favoured Squire.

"She is lying very still, but she will neither speak nor eat. I don't
even think she is crying," said Molly, volunteering this account, for
the Squire was for the moment too much absorbed in his grandson to
ask many questions.

Robinson put in his word: "Dick Hayward, he's Boots at the Hamley
Arms, says the coach she come by started at five this morning from
London, and the passengers said she'd been crying a deal on the road,
when she thought folks were not noticing; and she never came in to
meals with the rest, but stopped feeding her child."

"She'll be tired out; we must let her rest," said the Squire. "And I
do believe this little chap is going to sleep in my arms. God bless
him."

But Molly stole out, and sent off a lad to Hollingford with a note to
her father. Her heart had warmed towards the poor stranger, and she
felt uncertain as to what ought to be the course pursued in her case.

She went up from time to time to look at the girl, scarce older than
herself, who lay there with her eyes open, but as motionless as
death. She softly covered her over, and let her feel the sympathetic
presence from time to time; and that was all she was allowed to do.
The Squire was curiously absorbed in the child, but Molly's supreme
tenderness was for the mother. Not but what she admired the sturdy,
gallant, healthy little fellow, whose every limb, and square inch of
clothing, showed the tender and thrifty care that had been taken of
him. By-and-by the Squire said in a whisper,--

"She's not like a Frenchwoman, is she, Molly?"

"I don't know. I don't know what Frenchwomen are like. People say
Cynthia is French."

"And she didn't look like a servant? We won't speak of Cynthia since
she's served my Roger so. Why, I began to think, as soon as I could
think after _that_, how I would make Roger and her happy, and have
them married at once; and then came that letter! I never wanted her
for a daughter-in-law, not I. But he did, it seems; and he wasn't one
for wanting many things for himself. But it's all over now; only we
won't talk of her; and maybe, as you say, she was more French than
English. This poor thing looks like a gentlewoman, I think. I hope
she's got friends who'll take care of her,--she can't be above
twenty. I thought she must be older than my poor lad!"

"She's a gentle, pretty creature," said Molly. "But--but I sometimes
think it has killed her; she lies like one dead." And Molly could not
keep from crying softly at the thought.

"Nay, nay!" said the Squire. "It's not so easy to break one's heart.
Sometimes I've wished it were. But one has to go on living--'all
the appointed days,' as it says in the Bible. But we'll do our best
for her. We'll not think of letting her go away till she's fit to
travel."

Molly wondered in her heart about this going away, on which the
Squire seemed fully resolved. She was sure that he intended to keep
the child; perhaps he had a legal right to do so;--but would the
mother ever part from it? Her father, however, would solve the
difficulty,--her father, whom she always looked to as so clear-seeing
and experienced. She watched and waited for his coming. The February
evening drew on; the child lay asleep in the Squire's arms till his
grandfather grew tired, and laid him down on the sofa: the large
square-cornered yellow sofa upon which Mrs. Hamley used to sit,
supported by pillows in a half-reclining position. Since her time it
had been placed against the wall, and had served merely as a piece
of furniture to fill up the room. But once again a human figure was
lying upon it; a little human creature, like a cherub in some old
Italian picture. The Squire remembered his wife as he put the child
down. He thought of her as he said to Molly,--

"How pleased she would have been!" But Molly thought of the poor
young widow upstairs. AimÄe was her "she" at the first moment.
Presently,--but it seemed a long long time first,--she heard the
quick prompt sounds which told of her father's arrival. In he
came--to the room as yet only lighted by the fitful blaze of the
fire.




CHAPTER LIV.

MOLLY GIBSON'S WORTH IS DISCOVERED.


Mr. Gibson came in rubbing his hands after his frosty ride. Molly
judged from the look in his eye that he had been fully informed of
the present state of things at the Hall by some one. But he simply
went up to and greeted the Squire, and waited to hear what was said
to him. The Squire was fumbling at the taper on the writing-table,
and before he answered much he lighted it, and signing to his friend
to follow him, he went softly to the sofa and showed him the sleeping
child, taking the utmost care not to arouse it by flare or sound.

"Well! this is a fine young gentleman," said Mr. Gibson, returning
to the fire rather sooner than the Squire expected. "And you've got
the mother here, I understand. Mrs. Osborne Hamley, as we must call
her, poor thing! It's a sad coming home to her; for I hear she knew
nothing of his death." He spoke without exactly addressing any one,
so that either Molly or the Squire might answer as they liked. The
Squire said,--

"Yes! She's felt it a terrible shock. She's upstairs in the best
bedroom. I should like you to see her, Gibson, if she'll let you. We
must do our duty by her, for my poor lad's sake. I wish he could have
seen his boy lying there; I do. I daresay it preyed on him to have to
keep it all to himself. He might ha' known me, though. He might ha'
known my bark was waur than my bite. It's all over now, though; and
God forgive me if I was too sharp. I'm punished now."

Molly grew impatient on the mother's behalf.

"Papa, I feel as if she was very ill; perhaps worse than we think.
Will you go and see her at once?"

Mr. Gibson followed her upstairs, and the Squire came too,
thinking that he would do his duty now, and even feeling some
self-satisfaction at conquering his desire to stay with the child.
They went into the room where she had been taken. She lay quite still
in the same position as at first. Her eyes were open and tearless,
fixed on the wall. Mr. Gibson spoke to her, but she did not answer;
he lifted her hand to feel her pulse; she never noticed.

"Bring me some wine at once, and order some beef-tea," he said to
Molly.

But when he tried to put the wine into her mouth as she lay there on
her side, she made no effort to receive or swallow it, and it ran out
upon the pillow. Mr. Gibson left the room abruptly; Molly chafed the
little inanimate hand; the Squire stood by in dumb dismay, touched in
spite of himself by the death-in-life of one so young, and who must
have been so much beloved.

Mr. Gibson came back two steps at a time; he was carrying the
half-awakened child in his arms. He did not scruple to rouse him into
yet further wakefulness--did not grieve to hear him begin to wail and
cry. His eyes were on the figure upon the bed, which at that sound
quivered all through; and when her child was laid at her back, and
began caressingly to scramble yet closer, AimÄe turned round, and
took him in her arms, and lulled him and soothed him with the soft
wont of mother's love.

Before she lost this faint consciousness, which was habit or instinct
rather than thought, Mr. Gibson spoke to her in French. The child's
one word of "maman" had given him this clue. It was the language
sure to be most intelligible to her dulled brain; and as it
happened,--only Mr. Gibson did not think of that--it was the language
in which she had been commanded, and had learnt to obey.

Mr. Gibson's tongue was a little stiff at first, but by-and-by he
spoke it with all his old readiness. He extorted from her short
answers at first, then longer ones, and from time to time he plied
her with little drops of wine, until some further nourishment should
be at hand. Molly was struck by her father's low tones of comfort and
sympathy, although she could not follow what was said quickly enough
to catch the meaning of what passed.

By-and-by, however, when her father had done all that he could, and
they were once more downstairs, he told them more about her journey
than they yet knew. The hurry, the sense of acting in defiance of
a prohibition, the over-mastering anxiety, the broken night, and
fatigue of the journey, had ill prepared her for the shock at last,
and Mr. Gibson was seriously alarmed for the consequences. She had
wandered strangely in her replies to him; he had perceived that she
was wandering, and had made great efforts to recall her senses;
but Mr. Gibson foresaw that some bodily illness was coming on,
and stopped late that night, arranging many things with Molly and
the Squire. One--the only--comfort arising from her state was the
probability that she would be entirely unconscious by the morrow--the
day of the funeral. Worn out by the contending emotions of the day,
the Squire seemed now unable to look beyond the wrench and trial of
the next twelve hours. He sate with his head in his hands, declining
to go to bed, refusing to dwell on the thought of his grandchild--not
three hours ago such a darling in his eyes. Mr. Gibson gave some
instructions to one of the maid-servants as to the watch she was to
keep by Mrs. Osborne Hamley, and insisted on Molly's going to bed.
When she pleaded the apparent necessity of her staying up, he said,--

"Now, Molly, look how much less trouble the dear old Squire would
give if he would obey orders. He is only adding to anxiety by
indulging himself. One pardons everything to extreme grief, however.
But you will have enough to do to occupy all your strength for days
to come; and go to bed you must now. I only wish I saw my way as
clearly through other things as I do to your nearest duty. I wish I'd
never let Roger go wandering off; he'll wish it too, poor fellow!
Did I tell you Cynthia is going off in hot haste to her uncle
Kirkpatrick's? I suspect a visit to him will stand in lieu of going
out to Russia as a governess."

"I am sure she was quite serious in wishing for that."

"Yes, yes! at the time. I've no doubt she thought she was sincere
in intending to go. But the great thing was to get out of the
unpleasantness of the present time and place; and uncle Kirkpatrick's
will do this as effectually, and more pleasantly, than a situation at
Nishni-Novgorod in an ice-palace."

He had given Molly's thoughts a turn, which was what he wanted to
do. Molly could not help remembering Mr. Henderson, and his offer,
and all the consequent hints; and wondering, and wishing--what did
she wish? or had she been falling asleep? Before she had quite
ascertained this point she was asleep in reality.

After this, long days passed over in a monotonous round of care; for
no one seemed to think of Molly's leaving the Hall during the woeful
illness that befell Mrs. Osborne Hamley. It was not that her father
allowed her to take much active part in the nursing; the Squire gave
him _carte-blanche_, and he engaged two efficient hospital nurses to
watch over the unconscious AimÄe; but Molly was needed to receive the
finer directions as to her treatment and diet. It was not that she
was wanted for the care of the little boy; the Squire was too jealous
of the child's exclusive love for that, and one of the housemaids was
employed in the actual physical charge of him; but he needed some one
to listen to his incontinence of language, both when his passionate
regret for his dead son came uppermost, and also when he had
discovered some extraordinary charm in that son's child; and again
when he was oppressed with the uncertainty of AimÄe's long-continued
illness. Molly was not so good or so bewitching a listener to
ordinary conversation as Cynthia; but where her heart was interested
her sympathy was deep and unfailing. In this case she only wished
that the Squire could really feel that AimÄe was not the encumbrance
which he evidently considered her to be. Not that he would have
acknowledged the fact, if it had been put before him in plain words.
He fought against the dim consciousness of what was in his mind; he
spoke repeatedly of patience when no one but himself was impatient;
he would often say that when she grew better she must not be allowed
to leave the Hall until she was perfectly strong, when no one was
even contemplating the remotest chance of her leaving her child,
excepting only himself. Molly once or twice asked her father if she
might not speak to the Squire, and represent the hardship of sending
her away--the improbability that she would consent to quit her boy,
and so on; but Mr. Gibson only replied,--

"Wait quietly. Time enough when nature and circumstance have had
their chance, and have failed."

It was well that Molly was such a favourite with the old servants;
for she had frequently to restrain and to control. To be sure, she
had her father's authority to back her; and they were aware that
where her own comfort, ease, or pleasure was concerned she never
interfered, but submitted to their will. If the Squire had known of
the want of attendance to which she submitted with the most perfect
meekness, as far as she herself was the only sufferer, he would have
gone into a towering rage. But Molly hardly thought of it, so anxious
was she to do all she could for others, and to remember the various
charges which her father gave her in his daily visits. Perhaps he
did not spare her enough; she was willing and uncomplaining; but one
day after Mrs. Osborne Hamley had "taken the turn," as the nurses
called it, when she was lying weak as a new-born baby, but with her
faculties all restored, and her fever gone,--when spring buds were
blooming out, and spring birds sang merrily,--Molly answered to her
father's sudden questioning that she felt unaccountably weary; that
her head ached heavily, and that she was aware of a sluggishness of
thought which it required a painful effort to overcome.

"Don't go on," said Mr. Gibson, with a quick pang of anxiety, almost
of remorse. "Lie down here--with your back to the light. I'll come
back and see you before I go." And off he went in search of the
Squire. He had a good long walk before he came upon Mr. Hamley in
a field of spring wheat, where the women were weeding, his little
grandson holding to his finger in the intervals of short walks of
inquiry into the dirtiest places, which was all his sturdy little
limbs could manage.

"Well, Gibson, and how goes the patient? Better? I wish we could
get her out of doors, such a fine day as it is. It would make her
strong as soon as anything. I used to beg my poor lad to come out
more. Maybe, I worried him; but the air is the finest thing for
strengthening that I know of. Though, perhaps, she'll not thrive in
English air as if she'd been born here; and she'll not be quite right
till she gets back to her native place, wherever that is."

"I don't know. I begin to think we shall get her quite round here;
and I don't know that she could be in a better place. But it's not
about her. May I order the carriage for my Molly?" Mr. Gibson's voice
sounded as if he was choking a little as he said these last words.

"To be sure," said the Squire, setting the child down. He had been
holding him in his arms the last few minutes: but now he wanted all
his eyes to look into Mr. Gibson's face. "I say," said he, catching
hold of Mr. Gibson's arm, "what's the matter, man? Don't twitch up
your face like that, but speak!"

"Nothing's the matter," said Mr. Gibson, hastily. "Only I want her at
home, under my own eye;" and he turned away to go to the house. But
the Squire left his field and his weeders, and kept at Mr. Gibson's
side. He wanted to speak, but his heart was so full he did not know
what to say. "I say, Gibson," he got out at last, "your Molly is
liker a child of mine than a stranger; and I reckon we've all on us
been coming too hard upon her. You don't think there's much amiss, do
you?"

"How can I tell?" said Mr. Gibson, almost savagely. But any hastiness
of temper was instinctively understood by the Squire; and he was not
offended, though he did not speak again till they reached the house.
Then he went to order the carriage, and stood by sorrowful enough
while the horses were being put in. He felt as if he should not know
what to do without Molly; he had never known her value, he thought,
till now. But he kept silence on this view of the case; which was a
praiseworthy effort on the part of one who usually let by-standers
see and hear as much of his passing feelings as if he had had a
window in his breast. He stood by while Mr. Gibson helped the
faintly-smiling, tearful Molly into the carriage. Then the Squire
mounted on the step and kissed her hand; but when he tried to thank
her and bless her, he broke down; and as soon as he was once more
safely on the ground, Mr. Gibson cried out to the coachman to drive
on. And so Molly left Hamley Hall. From time to time her father
rode up to the window, and made some little cheerful and apparently
careless remark. When they came within two miles of Hollingford, he
put spurs to his horse, and rode briskly past the carriage windows,
kissing his hand to the occupant as he did so. He went on to prepare
her home for Molly: when she arrived Mrs. Gibson was ready to greet
her. Mr. Gibson had given one or two of his bright, imperative
orders, and Mrs. Gibson was feeling rather lonely "without either of
her two dear girls at home," as she phrased it, to herself as well as
to others.

"Why, my sweet Molly, this is an unexpected pleasure. Only this
morning I said to papa, 'When do you think we shall see our Molly
back?' He did not say much--he never does, you know; but I am sure he
thought directly of giving me this surprise, this pleasure. You're
looking a little--what shall I call it? I remember such a pretty line
of poetry, 'Oh, call her fair, not pale!'--so we'll call you fair."

"You'd better not call her anything, but let her get to her own room
and have a good rest as soon as possible. Haven't you got a trashy
novel or two in the house? That's the literature to send her to
sleep."

He did not leave her till he had seen her laid on a sofa in a
darkened room, with some slight pretence of reading in her hand. Then
he came away, leading his wife, who turned round at the door to kiss
her hand to Molly, and make a little face of unwillingness to be
dragged away.

"Now, Hyacinth," said he, as he took his wife into the drawing-room,
"she will need much care. She has been overworked, and I've been a
fool. That's all. We must keep her from all worry and care,--but I
won't answer for it that she'll not have an illness, for all that!"

"Poor thing! she does look worn out. She is something like me, her
feelings are too much for her. But now she is come home she shall
find us as cheerful as possible. I can answer for myself; and you
really must brighten up your doleful face, my dear--nothing so
bad for invalids as the appearance of depression in those around
them. I have had such a pleasant letter from Cynthia to-day. Uncle
Kirkpatrick really seems to make so much of her, he treats her just
like a daughter; he has given her a ticket to the Concerts of Ancient
Music; and Mr. Henderson has been to call on her, in spite of all
that has gone before."

For an instant, Mr. Gibson thought that it was easy enough for
his wife to be cheerful, with the pleasant thoughts and evident
anticipations she had in her mind, but a little more difficult for
him to put off his doleful looks while his own child lay in a state
of suffering and illness which might be the precursor of a still
worse malady. But he was always a man for immediate action as soon
as he had resolved on the course to be taken; and he knew that "some
must watch, while some must sleep; so runs the world away."

The illness which he apprehended came upon Molly; not violently or
acutely, so that there was any immediate danger to be dreaded; but
making a long pull upon her strength, which seemed to lessen day
by day, until at last her father feared that she might become a
permanent invalid. There was nothing very decided or alarming to tell
Cynthia, and Mrs. Gibson kept the dark side from her in her letters.
"Molly was feeling the spring weather;" or "Molly had been a good
deal overdone with her stay at the Hall, and was resting;" such
little sentences told nothing of Molly's real state. But then, as
Mrs. Gibson said to herself, it would be a pity to disturb Cynthia's
pleasure by telling her much about Molly; indeed, there was not much
to tell, one day was so like another. But it so happened that Lady
Harriet,--who came whenever she could to sit awhile with Molly,
at first against Mrs. Gibson's will, and afterwards with her full
consent,--for reasons of her own, Lady Harriet wrote a letter to
Cynthia, to which she was urged by Mrs. Gibson. It fell out in this
manner:--One day, when Lady Harriet was sitting in the drawing-room
for a few minutes after she had been with Molly, she said,--

"Really, Clare, I spend so much time in your house that I'm going
to establish a work-basket here. Mary has infected me with her
notability, and I'm going to work mamma a footstool. It is to be
a surprise; and so if I do it here she will know nothing about it.
Only I cannot match the gold beads I want for the pansies in this
dear little town; and Hollingford, who could send me down stars and
planets if I asked him, I make no doubt, could no more match beads
than--"

"My dear Lady Harriet! you forget Cynthia! Think what a pleasure it
would be to her to do anything for you."

"Would it? Then she shall have plenty of it; but mind, it is you who
have answered for her. She shall get me some wool too; how good I am
to confer so much pleasure on a fellow-creature! But seriously, do
you think I might write and give her a few commissions? Neither Agnes
nor Mary are in town--"

"I am sure she would be delighted," said Mrs. Gibson, who also took
into consideration the reflection of aristocratic honour that would
fall upon Cynthia if she had a letter from Lady Harriet while at
Mr. Kirkpatrick's. So she gave the address, and Lady Harriet wrote.
All the first part of the letter was taken up with apology and
commissions; but then, never doubting but that Cynthia was aware of
Molly's state, she went on to say--

"I saw Molly this morning. Twice I have been forbidden admittance, as
she was too ill to see any one out of her own family. I wish we could
begin to perceive a change for the better; but she looks more fading
every time, and I fear Mr. Gibson considers it a very anxious case."

The day but one after this letter was despatched, Cynthia walked into
the drawing-room at home with as much apparent composure as if she
had left it not an hour before. Mrs. Gibson was dozing, but believing
herself to be reading; she had been with Molly the greater part of
the morning, and now after her lunch, and the invalid's pretence of
early dinner, she considered herself entitled to some repose. She
started up as Cynthia came in:

"Cynthia! Dear child, where have you come from? Why in the world have
you come? My poor nerves! My heart is quite fluttering; but, to be
sure, it's no wonder with all this anxiety I have to undergo. Why
have you come back?"

"Because of the anxiety you speak of, mamma. I never knew,--you never
told me how ill Molly was."

"Nonsense! I beg your pardon, my dear, but it's really nonsense.
Molly's illness is only nervous, Mr. Gibson says. A nervous fever;
but you must remember nerves are mere fancy, and she's getting
better. Such a pity for you to have left your uncle's. Who told you
about Molly?"

"Lady Harriet. She wrote about some wool--"

"I know,--I know. But you might have known she always exaggerates
things. Not but what I have been almost worn out with nursing.
Perhaps, after all, it is a very good thing you have come, my dear;
and now you shall come down into the dining-room and have some lunch,
and tell me all the Hyde Park Street news--into my room,--don't go
into yours yet--Molly is so sensitive to noise!"

While Cynthia ate her lunch, Mrs. Gibson went on questioning. "And
your aunt, how is her cold? And Helen, quite strong again? Margaretta
as pretty as ever? The boys are at Harrow, I suppose? And my old
favourite, Mr. Henderson?" She could not manage to slip in this last
inquiry naturally; in spite of herself there was a change of tone, an
accent of eagerness. Cynthia did not reply on the instant; she poured
herself out some water with great deliberation, and then said,--

"My aunt is quite well; Helen is as strong as she ever is, and
Margaretta very pretty. The boys are at Harrow, and I conclude that
Mr. Henderson is enjoying his usual health, for he was to dine at my
uncle's to-day."

"Take care, Cynthia. Look how you are cutting that gooseberry tart,"
said Mrs. Gibson, with sharp annoyance; not provoked by Cynthia's
present action, although it gave excuse for a little vent of temper.
"I can't think how you could come off in this sudden kind of way; I
am sure it must have annoyed your uncle and aunt. I daresay they'll
never ask you again."

"On the contrary, I am to go back there as soon as ever I can be easy
to leave Molly."

"'Easy to leave Molly.' Now that really is nonsense, and rather
uncomplimentary to me, I must say: nursing her as I have been doing,
daily, and almost nightly; for I have been wakened times out of
number by Mr. Gibson getting up, and going to see if she had had her
medicine properly."

"I'm afraid she has been very ill?" asked Cynthia.

"Yes, she has, in one way; but not in another. It was what I call
more a tedious, than an interesting illness. There was no immediate
danger, but she lay much in the same state from day to day."

"I wish I had known!" sighed Cynthia. "Do you think I might go and
see her now?"

"I'll go and prepare her. You'll find her a good deal better than
she has been. Ah; here's Mr. Gibson!" He came into the dining-room,
hearing voices. Cynthia thought that he looked much older.

"You here!" said he, coming forward to shake hands. "Why, how did you
come?"

"By the 'Umpire.' I never knew Molly had been so ill, or I would have
come directly." Her eyes were full of tears. Mr. Gibson was touched;
he shook her hand again, and murmured, "You're a good girl, Cynthia."

"She's heard one of dear Lady Harriet's exaggerated accounts," said
Mrs. Gibson, "and come straight off. I tell her it's very foolish,
for Molly is a great deal better now."

"Very foolish," said Mr. Gibson, echoing his wife's words, but
smiling at Cynthia. "But sometimes one likes foolish people for their
folly, better than wise people for their wisdom."

"I am afraid folly always annoys me," said his wife. "However,
Cynthia is here, and what is done, is done."

"Very true, my dear. And now I'll run up and see my little girl,
and tell her the good news. You'd better follow me in a couple of
minutes." This to Cynthia.

Molly's delight at seeing her showed itself first in a few happy
tears; and then in soft caresses and inarticulate sounds of love.
Once or twice she began, "It is such a pleasure," and there she
stopped short. But the eloquence of these five words sank deep into
Cynthia's heart. She had returned just at the right time, when Molly
wanted the gentle fillip of the society of a fresh and yet a familiar
person. Cynthia's tact made her talkative or silent, gay or grave,
as the varying humour of Molly required. She listened, too, with the
semblance, if not the reality, of unwearied interest, to Molly's
continual recurrence to all the time of distress and sorrow at Hamley
Hall, and to the scenes which had then so deeply impressed themselves
upon her susceptible nature. Cynthia instinctively knew that the
repetition of all these painful recollections would ease the
oppressed memory, which refused to dwell on anything but what had
occurred at a time of feverish disturbance of health. So she never
interrupted Molly, as Mrs. Gibson had so frequently done, with--"You
told me all that before, my dear. Let us talk of something else;" or,
"Really I cannot allow you to be always dwelling on painful thoughts.
Try and be a little more cheerful. Youth is gay. You are young,
and therefore you ought to be gay. That is put in a famous form of
speech; I forget exactly what it is called."

So Molly's health and spirits improved rapidly after Cynthia's
return: and although she was likely to retain many of her invalid
habits during the summer, she was able to take drives, and enjoy the
fine weather; it was only her as yet tender spirits that required a
little management. All the Hollingford people forgot that they had
ever thought of her except as a darling of the town; and each in his
or her way showed kind interest in her father's child. Miss Browning
and Miss Phoebe considered it quite a privilege that they were
allowed to see her a fortnight or three weeks before any one else;
Mrs. Goodenough, spectacles on nose, stirred dainty messes in a
silver saucepan for Molly's benefit; the Towers sent books, and
forced fruit, and new caricatures, and strange and delicate poultry;
humble patients of "the doctor," as Mr. Gibson was usually termed,
left the earliest cauliflowers they could grow in their cottage
gardens, with "their duty for Miss."

And last of all, though strongest in regard, most piteously eager in
interest, came Squire Hamley himself. When she was at the worst, he
rode over every day to hear the smallest detail, facing even Mrs.
Gibson (his abomination) if her husband was not at home, to ask and
hear, and ask and hear, till the tears were unconsciously stealing
down his cheeks. Every resource of his heart, or his house, or his
lands was searched and tried, if it could bring a moment's pleasure
to her; and whatever it might be that came from him, at her very
worst time, it brought out a dim smile upon her face.




CHAPTER LV.

AN ABSENT LOVER RETURNS.


[Illustration (untitled)]

And now it was late June; and to Molly's and her father's extreme
urgency in pushing, and Mr. and Mrs. Kirkpatrick's affectionate
persistency in pulling, Cynthia had yielded, and had gone back to
finish her interrupted visit in London, but not before the bruit of
her previous sudden return to nurse Molly had told strongly in her
favour in the fluctuating opinion of the little town. Her affair with
Mr. Preston was thrust into the shade; while every one was speaking
of her warm heart. Under the gleam of Molly's recovery everything
assumed a rosy hue, as indeed became the time when actual roses were
fully in bloom.

One morning Mrs. Gibson brought Molly a great basket of flowers, that
had been sent from the Hall. Molly still breakfasted in bed, but she
had just come down, and was now well enough to arrange the flowers
for the drawing-room, and as she did so with these blossoms, she made
some comments on each.

"Ah! these white pinks! They were Mrs. Hamley's favourite flower;
and so like her! This little bit of sweet briar, it quite scents the
room. It has pricked my fingers, but never mind. Oh, mamma, look
at this rose! I forget its name, but it is very rare, and grows up
in the sheltered corner of the wall, near the mulberry-tree. Roger
bought the tree for his mother with his own money when he was quite a
boy; he showed it me, and made me notice it."

"I daresay it was Roger who got it now. You heard papa say he had
seen him yesterday."

"No! Roger! Roger come home!" said Molly, turning first red, then
very white.

"Yes. Oh, I remember you had gone to bed before papa came in, and he
was called off early to tiresome Mrs. Beale. Yes, Roger turned up at
the Hall the day before yesterday."

But Molly leaned back against her chair, too faint to do more at the
flowers for some time. She had been startled by the suddenness of the
news. "Roger come home!"

It happened that Mr. Gibson was unusually busy on this particular
day, and he did not come home till late in the afternoon. But Molly
kept her place in the drawing-room all the time, not even going to
take her customary siesta, so anxious was she to hear everything
about Roger's return, which as yet appeared to her almost incredible.
But it was quite natural in reality; the long monotony of her illness
had made her lose all count of time. When Roger left England, his
idea was to coast round Africa on the eastern side until he reached
the Cape; and thence to make what further journey or voyage might
seem to him best in pursuit of his scientific objects. To Cape Town
all his letters had been addressed of late; and there, two months
before, he had received the intelligence of Osborne's death, as well
as Cynthia's hasty letter of relinquishment. He did not consider
that he was doing wrong in returning to England immediately, and
reporting himself to the gentlemen who had sent him out, with a
full explanation of the circumstances relating to Osborne's private
marriage and sudden death. He offered, and they accepted his offer,
to go out again for any time that they might think equivalent to the
five months he was yet engaged to them for. They were most of them
gentlemen of property, and saw the full importance of proving the
marriage of an eldest son, and installing his child as the natural
heir to a long-descended estate. This much information, but in a more
condensed form, Mr. Gibson gave to Molly, in a very few minutes. She
sat up on her sofa, looking very pretty with the flush on her cheeks,
and the brightness in her eyes.

"Well!" said she, when her father stopped speaking.

"Well! what?" asked he, playfully.

"Oh! why, such a number of things. I've been waiting all day to ask
you all about everything. How is he looking?"

"If a young man of twenty-four ever does take to growing taller, I
should say that he was taller. As it is, I suppose it's only that he
looks broader, stronger--more muscular."

"Oh! is he changed?" asked Molly, a little disturbed by this account.

"No, not changed; and yet not the same. He's as brown as a berry for
one thing; caught a little of the negro tinge, and a beard as fine
and sweeping as my bay-mare's tail."

"A beard! But go on, papa. Does he talk as he used to do? I should
know his voice amongst ten thousand."

"I didn't catch any Hottentot twang, if that's what you mean. Nor did
he say, 'Cżsar and Pompey berry much alike, 'specially Pompey,' which
is the only specimen of negro language I can remember just at this
moment."

"And which I never could see the wit of," said Mrs. Gibson, who had
come into the room after the conversation had begun; and did not
understand what it was aiming at. Molly fidgeted; she wanted to go on
with her questions and keep her father to definite and matter-of-fact
answers, and she knew that when his wife chimed into a conversation,
Mr. Gibson was very apt to find out that he must go about some
necessary piece of business.

"Tell me, how are they all getting on together?" It was an inquiry
which she did not make in general before Mrs. Gibson, for Molly and
her father had tacitly agreed to keep silence on what they knew or
had observed, respecting the three who formed the present family at
the Hall.

"Oh!" said Mr. Gibson, "Roger is evidently putting everything to
rights in his firm, quiet way."

"'Things to rights.' Why, what's wrong?" asked Mrs. Gibson quickly.
"The Squire and the French daughter-in-law don't get on well
together, I suppose? I am always so glad Cynthia acted with the
promptitude she did; it would have been very awkward for her to have
been mixed up with all these complications. Poor Roger! to find
himself supplanted by a child when he comes home!"

"You were not in the room, my dear, when I was telling Molly of the
reasons for Roger's return; it was to put his brother's child at once
into his rightful and legal place. So now, when he finds the work
partly done to his hands, he is happy and gratified in proportion."

"Then he is not much affected by Cynthia's breaking off her
engagement?" (Mrs. Gibson could afford to call it an "engagement"
now.) "I never did give him credit for very deep feelings."

"On the contrary, he feels it very acutely. He and I had a long talk
about it, yesterday."

Both Molly and Mrs. Gibson would have liked to have heard something
more about this conversation; but Mr. Gibson did not choose to go on
with the subject. The only point which he disclosed was that Roger
had insisted on his right to have a personal interview with Cynthia;
and, on hearing that she was in London at present, had deferred any
further explanation or expostulation by letter, preferring to await
her return.

Molly went on with her questions on other subjects. "And Mrs. Osborne
Hamley? How is she?"

"Wonderfully brightened up by Roger's presence. I don't think I've
ever seen her smile before; but she gives him the sweetest smiles
from time to time. They are evidently good friends; and she loses her
strange startled look when she speaks to him. I suspect she has been
quite aware of the Squire's wish that she should return to France;
and has been hard put to it to decide whether to leave her child or
not. The idea that she would have to make some such decision came
upon her when she was completely shattered by grief and illness, and
she hasn't had any one to consult as to her duty until Roger came,
upon whom she has evidently firm reliance. He told me something of
this himself."

"You seem to have had quite a long conversation with him, papa!"

"Yes. I was going to see old Abraham, when the Squire called to me
over the hedge, as I was jogging along. He told me the news; and
there was no resisting his invitation to come back and lunch with
them. Besides, one gets a great deal of meaning out of Roger's words;
it didn't take so very long a time to hear this much."

"I should think he would come and call upon us soon," said Mrs.
Gibson to Molly, "and then we shall see how much we can manage to
hear."

"Do you think he will, papa?" said Molly, more doubtfully. She
remembered the last time he was in that very room, and the hopes with
which he left it; and she fancied that she could see traces of this
thought in her father's countenance at his wife's speech.

"I can't tell, my dear. Until he's quite convinced of Cynthia's
intentions, it can't be very pleasant for him to come on mere visits
of ceremony to the house in which he has known her; but he's one who
will always do what he thinks right, whether pleasant or not."

Mrs. Gibson could hardly wait till her husband had finished his
sentence before she testified against a part of it.

"'Convinced of Cynthia's intentions!' I should think she had made
them pretty clear! What more does the man want?"

"He's not as yet convinced that the letter wasn't written in a fit
of temporary feeling. I've told him that this was true; although I
didn't feel it my place to explain to him the causes of that feeling.
He believes that he can induce her to resume the former footing.
I don't; and I've told him so; but, of course, he needs the full
conviction that she alone can give him."

"Poor Cynthia! My poor child!" said Mrs. Gibson, plaintively. "What
she has exposed herself to by letting herself be over-persuaded by
that man!"

Mr. Gibson's eyes flashed fire. But he kept his lips tight closed;
and only said, "'That man,' indeed!" quite below his breath.

Molly, too, had been damped by an expression or two in her father's
speech. "Mere visits of ceremony!" Was it so, indeed? A "mere visit
of ceremony!" Whatever it was, the call was paid before many days
were over. That he felt all the awkwardness of his position towards
Mrs. Gibson--that he was in reality suffering pain all the time--was
but too evident to Molly; but, of course, Mrs. Gibson saw nothing
of this in her gratification at the proper respect paid to her by
one whose name was in the newspapers that chronicled his return, and
about whom already Lord Cumnor and the Towers family had been making
inquiry.

Molly was sitting in her pretty white invalid's dress, half reading,
half dreaming, for the June air was so clear and ambient, the garden
so full of bloom, the trees so full of leaf, that reading by the open
window was only a pretence at such a time; besides which, Mrs. Gibson
continually interrupted her with remarks about the pattern of her
worsted work. It was after lunch--orthodox calling time, when Maria
ushered in Mr. Roger Hamley. Molly started up; and then stood shyly
and quietly in her place while a bronzed, bearded, grave man came
into the room, in whom she at first had to seek for the merry boyish
face she knew by heart only two years ago. But months in the climates
in which Roger had been travelling age as much as years in more
temperate regions. And constant thought and anxiety while in daily
peril of life deepen the lines of character upon the face. Moreover,
the circumstances that had of late affected him personally were not
of a nature to make him either buoyant or cheerful. But his voice was
the same; that was the first point of the old friend Molly caught,
when he addressed her in a tone far softer than he used in speaking
conventional politenesses to her stepmother.

"I was so sorry to hear how ill you had been! You are looking but
delicate!" letting his eyes rest upon her face with affectionate
examination. Molly felt herself colour all over with the
consciousness of his regard. To do something to put an end to it,
she looked up, and showed him her beautiful soft grey eyes, which he
never remembered to have noticed before. She smiled at him as she
blushed still deeper, and said,--

"Oh! I am quite strong now to what I was. It would be a shame to be
ill when everything is in its full summer beauty."

"I have heard how deeply we--I am indebted to you--my father can
hardly praise you--"

"Please don't," said Molly, the tears coming into her eyes in spite
of herself. He seemed to understand her at once; he went on as if
speaking to Mrs. Gibson: "Indeed, my little sister-in-law is never
weary of talking about Monsieur le Docteur, as she calls your
husband!"

"I have not had the pleasure of making Mrs. Osborne Hamley's
acquaintance yet," said Mrs. Gibson, suddenly aware of a duty which
might have been expected from her, "and I must beg you to apologize
to her for my remissness. But Molly has been such a care and anxiety
to me--for, you know, I look upon her quite as my own child--that
I really have not gone anywhere; excepting to the Towers, perhaps
I should say, which is just like another home to me. And then I
understood that Mrs. Osborne Hamley was thinking of returning to
France before long? Still it was very remiss."

The little trap thus set for news of what might be going on in the
Hamley family was quite successful. Roger answered her thus:--

"I am sure Mrs. Osborne Hamley will be very glad to see any friends
of the family, as soon as she is a little stronger. I hope she will
not go back to France at all. She is an orphan, and I trust we shall
induce her to remain with my father. But at present nothing is
arranged." Then, as if glad to have got over his "visit of ceremony,"
he got up and took leave. When he was at the door he looked back,
having, as he thought, a word more to say; but he quite forgot what
it was, for he surprised Molly's intent gaze, and sudden confusion at
discovery, and went away as soon as he could.

"Poor Osborne was right!" said he. "She has grown into delicate
fragrant beauty, just as he said she would: or is it the character
which has formed her face? Now the next time I enter these doors, it
will be to learn my fate!"

Mr. Gibson had told his wife of Roger's desire to have a personal
interview with Cynthia, rather with a view to her repeating what he
said to her daughter. He did not see any exact necessity for this, it
is true; but he thought it might be advisable that she should know
all the truth in which she was concerned, and he told his wife this.
But she took the affair into her own management, and, although she
apparently agreed with Mr. Gibson, she never named the affair to
Cynthia; all that she said to her was--

"Your old admirer, Roger Hamley, has come home in a great hurry,
in consequence of poor dear Osborne's unexpected decease. He must
have been rather surprised to find the widow and her little boy
established at the Hall. He came to call here the other day, and
made himself really rather agreeable, although his manners are not
improved by the society he has kept on his travels. Still I prophesy
he will be considered as a fashionable 'lion,' and perhaps the very
uncouthness which jars against my sense of refinement, may even
become admired in a scientific traveller, who has been into more
desert places, and eaten more extraordinary food, than any other
Englishman of the day. I suppose he has given up all chance of
inheriting the estate, for I hear he talks of returning to Africa,
and becoming a regular wanderer. Your name was not mentioned, but I
believe he inquired about you from Mr. Gibson."

"There!" said she to herself, as she folded up and directed her
letter; "that can't disturb her, or make her uncomfortable. And it's
all the truth too, or very near it. Of course he'll want to see her
when she comes back; but by that time I do hope Mr. Henderson will
have proposed again, and that that affair will be all settled."

But Cynthia returned to Hollingford one Tuesday morning, and in
answer to her mother's anxious inquiries on the subject, would only
say that Mr. Henderson had not offered again. "Why should he? She had
refused him once, and he did not know the reason of her refusal, at
least one of the reasons. She did not know if she should have taken
him if there had been no such person as Roger Hamley in the world.
No! Uncle and aunt Kirkpatrick had never heard anything about Roger's
offer,--nor had her cousins. She had always declared her wish to
keep it a secret, and she had not mentioned it to any one, whatever
other people might have done." Underneath this light and careless
vein there were other feelings; but Mrs. Gibson was not one to
probe beneath the surface. She had set her heart on Mr. Henderson's
marrying Cynthia very early in their acquaintance; and to know,
firstly, that the same wish had entered into his head, and that
Roger's attachment to Cynthia, with its consequences, had been
the obstacle; and secondly, that Cynthia herself with all the
opportunities of propinquity which she had lately had, had failed to
provoke a repetition of the offer,--was, as Mrs. Gibson said, "enough
to provoke a saint." All the rest of the day she alluded to Cynthia
as a disappointing and ungrateful daughter; Molly could not make out
why, and resented it for Cynthia, until the latter said, bitterly,
"Never mind, Molly. Mamma is only vexed because Mr.--because I have
not come back an engaged young lady."

"Yes; and I am sure you might have done,--there's the ingratitude! I
am not so unjust as to want you to do what you can't do!" said Mrs.
Gibson, querulously.

"But where's the ingratitude, mamma? I'm very much tired, and perhaps
that makes me stupid; but I cannot see the ingratitude." Cynthia
spoke very wearily, leaning her head back on the sofa-cushions, as if
she did not care to have an answer.

"Why, don't you see we are doing all we can for you; dressing you
well, and sending you to London; and when you might relieve us of the
expense of all this, you don't."

"No! Cynthia, I will speak," said Molly, all crimson with
indignation, and pushing away Cynthia's restraining hand. "I am sure
papa does not feel, and does not mind, any expense he incurs about
his daughters. And I know quite well that he does not wish us to
marry, unless--" She faltered and stopped.

"Unless what?" said Mrs. Gibson, half-mocking.

"Unless we love some one very dearly indeed," said Molly, in a low,
firm tone.

"Well, after this tirade--really rather indelicate, I must say--I
have done. I will neither help nor hinder any love-affairs of you two
young ladies. In my days we were glad of the advice of our elders."
And she left the room to put into fulfilment an idea which had just
struck her: to write a confidential letter to Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
giving her her version of Cynthia's "unfortunate entanglement," and
"delicate sense of honour," and hints of her entire indifference
to all the masculine portion of the world, Mr. Henderson being
dexterously excluded from the category.

"Oh, dear!" said Molly, throwing herself back in a chair, with a sigh
of relief, as Mrs. Gibson left the room; "how cross I do get since
I've been ill! But I couldn't bear her to speak as if papa grudged
you anything."

"I'm sure he doesn't, Molly. You need not defend him on my account.
But I'm sorry mamma still looks upon me as 'an encumbrance,' as the
advertisements in _The Times_ always call us unfortunate children.
But I've been an encumbrance to her all my life. I'm getting very
much into despair about everything, Molly. I shall try my luck in
Russia. I've heard of a situation as English governess at Moscow, in
a family owning whole provinces of land, and serfs by the hundred. I
put off writing my letter till I came home; I shall be as much out
of the way there as if I was married. Oh, dear! travelling all night
isn't good for the spirits. How is Mr. Preston?"

"Oh, he has taken Cumnor Grange, three miles away, and he never comes
in to the Hollingford tea-parties now. I saw him once in the street,
but it's a question which of us tried the hardest to get out of the
other's way."

"You've not said anything about Roger, yet."

"No; I didn't know if you would care to hear. He is very much
older-looking; quite a strong grown-up man. And papa says he is much
graver. Ask me any questions, if you want to know, but I have only
seen him once."

"I was in hopes he would have left the neighbourhood by this time.
Mamma said he was going to travel again."

"I can't tell," said Molly. "I suppose you know," she continued, but
hesitating a little before she spoke, "that he wishes to see you?"

"No! I never heard. I wish he would have been satisfied with my
letter. It was as decided as I could make it. If I say I won't see
him, I wonder if his will or mine will be the strongest?"

"His," said Molly. "But you must see him; you owe it to him. He will
never be satisfied without it."

"Suppose he talks me round into resuming the engagement? I should
only break it off again."

"Surely you can't be 'talked round' if your mind is made up. But
perhaps it is not really, Cynthia?" asked she, with a little wistful
anxiety betraying itself in her face.

"It is quite made up. I am going to teach little Russian girls; and
am never going to marry nobody."

"You are not serious, Cynthia. And yet it is a very serious thing."

But Cynthia went into one of her wild moods, and no more reason or
sensible meaning was to be got out of her at the time.




CHAPTER LVI.

"OFF WITH THE OLD LOVE, AND ON WITH THE NEW."


The next morning saw Mrs. Gibson in a much more contented frame of
mind. She had written and posted her letter, and the next thing was
to keep Cynthia in what she called a reasonable state, or, in other
words, to try and cajole her into docility. But it was so much labour
lost. Cynthia had already received a letter from Mr. Henderson before
she came down to breakfast,--a declaration of love, a proposal of
marriage as clear as words could make it; together with an intimation
that, unable to wait for the slow delays of the post, he was going
to follow her down to Hollingford, and would arrive at the same time
that she had done herself on the previous day. Cynthia said nothing
about this letter to any one. She came late into the breakfast-room,
after Mr. and Mrs. Gibson had finished the actual business of the
meal; but her unpunctuality was quite accounted for by the fact that
she had been travelling all the night before. Molly was not as yet
strong enough to get up so early. Cynthia hardly spoke, and did not
touch her food. Mr. Gibson went about his daily business, and Cynthia
and her mother were left alone.

"My dear," said Mrs. Gibson, "you are not eating your breakfast as
you should do. I am afraid our meals seem very plain and homely to
you after those in Hyde Park Street?"

"No," said Cynthia; "I'm not hungry, that's all."

"If we were as rich as your uncle, I should feel it to be both a duty
and a pleasure to keep an elegant table; but limited means are a
sad clog to one's wishes. I don't suppose that, work as he will, Mr.
Gibson can earn more than he does at present; while the capabilities
of the law are boundless. Lord Chancellor! Titles as well as
fortune!"

Cynthia was almost too much absorbed in her own reflections to reply,
but she did say,--"Hundreds of briefless barristers. Take the other
side, mamma."

"Well; but I have noticed that many of these have private fortunes."

"Perhaps. Mamma, I expect Mr. Henderson will come and call this
morning."

"Oh, my precious child! But how do you know? My darling Cynthia, am I
to congratulate you?"

"No! I suppose I must tell you. I have had a letter this morning from
him, and he's coming down by the 'Umpire' to-day."

"But he has offered? He surely must mean to offer, at any rate?"

Cynthia played with her teaspoon before she replied; then she looked
up, like one startled from a dream, and caught the echo of her
mother's question.

"Offered! yes, I suppose he has."

"And you accept him? Say 'yes,' Cynthia, and make me happy!"

"I shan't say 'yes' to make any one happy except myself, and the
Russian scheme has great charms for me." She said this to plague
her mother, and lessen Mrs. Gibson's exuberance of joy, it must be
confessed; for her mind was pretty well made up. But it did not
affect Mrs. Gibson, who affixed even less truth to it than there
really was. The idea of a residence in a new, strange country, among
new, strange people, was not without allurement to Cynthia.

"You always look nice, dear; but don't you think you had better put
on that pretty lilac silk?"

"I shall not vary a thread or a shred from what I have got on now."

"You dear, wilful creature! you know you always look lovely in
whatever you put on." So, kissing her daughter, Mrs. Gibson left the
room, intent on the lunch which should impress Mr. Henderson at once
with an idea of family refinement.

Cynthia went upstairs to Molly; she was inclined to tell her about
Mr. Henderson, but she found it impossible to introduce the subject
naturally, so she left it to time to reveal the future as gradually
as it might. Molly was tired with a bad night; and her father, in
his flying visit to his darling before going out, had advised her to
stay upstairs for the greater part of the morning, and to keep quiet
in her own room till after her early dinner, so Time had not a fair
chance of telling her what he had in store in his budget. Mrs. Gibson
sent an apology to Molly for not paying her her usual morning visit,
and told Cynthia to give Mr. Henderson's probable coming as a reason
for her occupation downstairs. But Cynthia did no such thing. She
kissed Molly, and sate silently by her, holding her hand; till at
length she jumped up, and said, "You shall be left alone now, little
one. I want you to be very well and very bright this afternoon: so
rest now." And Cynthia left her, and went to her own room, locked the
door, and began to think.

Some one was thinking about her at the same time, and it was not Mr.
Henderson. Roger had heard from Mr. Gibson that Cynthia had come
home, and he was resolving to go to her at once, and have one strong,
manly attempt to overcome the obstacles whatever they might be--and
of their nature he was not fully aware--that she had conjured up
against the continuance of their relation to each other. He left his
father--he left them all--and went off into the woods, to be alone
until the time came when he might mount his horse and ride over to
put his fate to the touch. He was as careful as ever not to interfere
with the morning hours that were tabooed to him of old; but waiting
was very hard work when he knew that she was so near, and the time so
near at hand.

Yet he rode slowly, compelling himself to quietness and patience when
he was once really on the way to her.

"Mrs. Gibson at home? Miss Kirkpatrick?" he asked of the servant,
Maria, who opened the door. She was confused, but he did not notice
it.

"I think so--I'm not sure! Will you walk up into the drawing-room,
sir? Miss Gibson is there, I know."

So he went upstairs, all his nerves on the strain for the coming
interview with Cynthia. It was either a relief or a disappointment,
he was not sure which, to find only Molly in the room:--Molly, half
lying on the couch in the bow-window which commanded the garden;
draped in soft white drapery, very white herself, and a laced
half-handkerchief tied over her head to save her from any ill effects
of the air that blew in through the open window. He was so ready to
speak to Cynthia that he hardly knew what to say to any one else.

"I am afraid you are not so well," he said to Molly, who sat up to
receive him, and who suddenly began to tremble with emotion.

"I'm a little tired, that's all," said she; and then she was quite
silent, hoping that he might go, and yet somehow wishing him to stay.
But he took a chair and placed it near her, opposite to the window.
He thought that surely Maria would tell Miss Kirkpatrick that she was
wanted, and that at any moment he might hear her light quick footstep
on the stairs. He felt he ought to talk, but he could not think of
anything to say. The pink flush came out on Molly's cheeks; once or
twice she was on the point of speaking, but again she thought better
of it; and the pauses between their faint disjointed remarks became
longer and longer. Suddenly, in one of these pauses, the merry murmur
of distant happy voices in the garden came nearer and nearer; Molly
looked more and more uneasy and flushed, and in spite of herself
kept watching Roger's face. He could see over her into the garden. A
sudden deep colour overspread him, as if his heart had sent its blood
out coursing at full gallop. Cynthia and Mr. Henderson had come in
sight; he eagerly talking to her as he bent forward to look into her
face; she, her looks half averted in pretty shyness, was evidently
coquetting about some flowers, which she either would not give,
or would not take. Just then, for the lovers had emerged from the
shrubbery into comparatively public life, Maria was seen approaching;
apparently she had feminine tact enough to induce Cynthia to leave
her present admirer, and to go a few steps to meet her to receive
the whispered message that Mr. Roger Hamley was there, and wished to
speak to her. Roger could see her startled gesture; she turned back
to say something to Mr. Henderson before coming towards the house.
Now Roger spoke to Molly--spoke hurriedly, spoke hoarsely.


[Illustration: CYNTHIA'S LAST LOVER.]


"Molly, tell me! Is it too late for me to speak to Cynthia? I came on
purpose. Who is that man?"

"Mr. Henderson. He only came to-day--but now he is her accepted
lover. Oh, Roger, forgive me the pain!"

"Tell her I have been, and am gone. Send out word to her. Don't let
her be interrupted."

And Roger ran downstairs at full speed, and Molly heard the
passionate clang of the outer door. He had hardly left the house
before Cynthia entered the room, pale and resolute.

"Where is he?" she said, looking around, as if he might yet be
hidden.

"Gone!" said Molly, very faint.

"Gone. Oh, what a relief! It seems to be my fate never to be off with
the old lover before I am on with the new, and yet I did write as
decidedly as I could. Why, Molly, what's the matter?" for now Molly
had fainted away utterly. Cynthia flew to the bell, summoned Maria,
water, salts, wine, anything; and as soon as Molly, gasping and
miserable, became conscious again, she wrote a little pencil-note to
Mr. Henderson, bidding him return to the "George," whence he had come
in the morning, and saying that if he obeyed her at once, he might be
allowed to call again in the evening, otherwise she would not see him
till the next day. This she sent down by Maria, and the unlucky man
never believed but that it was Miss Gibson's sudden indisposition in
the first instance that had deprived him of his charmer's company.
He comforted himself for the long solitary afternoon by writing to
tell all his friends of his happiness, and amongst them uncle and
aunt Kirkpatrick, who received his letter by the same post as that
discreet epistle of Mrs. Gibson's, which she had carefully arranged
to reveal as much as she wished, and no more.

"Was he very terrible?" asked Cynthia, as she sate with Molly in the
stillness of Mrs. Gibson's dressing-room.

"Oh, Cynthia, it was such pain to see him, he suffered so!"

"I don't like people of deep feelings," said Cynthia, pouting. "They
don't suit me. Why couldn't he let me go without this fuss? I'm not
worth his caring for!"

"You have the happy gift of making people love you. Remember Mr.
Preston,--he too wouldn't give up hope."

"Now I won't have you classing Roger Hamley and Mr. Preston together
in the same sentence. One was as much too bad for me as the other
is too good. Now I hope that man in the garden is the _juste
milieu_,--I'm that myself, for I don't think I'm vicious, and I know
I'm not virtuous."

"Do you really like him enough to marry him?" asked Molly earnestly.
"Do think, Cynthia. It won't do to go on throwing your lovers off;
you give pain that I'm sure you do not mean to do,--that you cannot
understand."

"Perhaps I can't. I'm not offended. I never set up for what I am
not, and I know I'm not constant. I've told Mr. Henderson so--" She
stopped, blushing and smiling at the recollection.

"You have! and what did he say?"

"That he liked me just as I was; so you see he's fairly warned. Only
he's a little afraid, I suppose,--for he wants me to be married very
soon, almost directly, in fact. But I don't know if I shall give
way,--you hardly saw him, Molly,--but he's coming again to-night, and
mind, I'll never forgive you if you don't think him very charming.
I believe I cared for him when he offered all those months ago, but
I tried to think I didn't; only sometimes I really was so unhappy,
I thought I must put an iron band round my heart to keep it from
breaking, like the Faithful John of the German story,--do you
remember, Molly?--how when his master came to his crown and his
fortune and his lady-love, after innumerable trials and disgraces,
and was driving away from the church where he'd been married in a
coach and six, with Faithful John behind, the happy couple heard
three great cracks in succession, and on inquiring, they were the
iron-bands round his heart, that Faithful John had worn all during
the time of his master's tribulation, to keep it from breaking."

In the evening Mr. Henderson came. Molly had been very curious to see
him; and when she saw him she was not sure whether she liked him or
not. He was handsome, without being conceited; gentlemanly, without
being foolishly fine. He talked easily, and never said a silly thing.
He was perfectly well-appointed, yet never seemed to have given a
thought to his dress. He was good-tempered and kind; not without some
of the cheerful flippancy of repartee which belonged to his age and
profession, and which his age and profession are apt to take for
wit. But he wanted something in Molly's eyes--at any rate, in this
first interview, and in her heart of hearts she thought him rather
commonplace. But of course she said nothing of this to Cynthia, who
was evidently as happy as she could be. Mrs. Gibson, too, was in
the seventh heaven of ecstasy, and spoke but little; but what she
did say, expressed the highest sentiments in the finest language.
Mr. Gibson was not with them for long, but while he was there he
was evidently studying the unconscious Mr. Henderson with his dark
penetrating eyes. Mr. Henderson behaved exactly as he ought to have
done to everybody: respectful to Mr. Gibson, deferential to Mrs.
Gibson, friendly to Molly, devoted to Cynthia.

The next time Mr. Gibson found Molly alone, he began,--"Well! and how
do you like the new relation that is to be?"

"It's difficult to say. I think he's very nice in all his bits,
but--rather dull on the whole."

"I think him perfection," said Mr. Gibson, to Molly's surprise;
but in an instant afterwards she saw that he had been speaking
ironically. He went on. "I don't wonder she preferred him to Roger
Hamley. Such scents! such gloves! And then his hair and his cravat!"

"Now, papa, you're not fair. He is a great deal more than that. One
could see that he had very good feeling; and he is very handsome, and
very much attached to her."

"So was Roger. However, I must confess I shall be only too glad to
have her married. She's a girl who'll always have some love-affair on
hand, and will always be apt to slip through a man's fingers if he
doesn't look sharp; as I was saying to Roger--"

"You have seen him, then, since he was here?"

"Met him in the street."

"How was he?"

"I don't suppose he'd been going through the pleasantest thing in
the world; but he'll get over it before long. He spoke with sense
and resignation, and didn't say much about it; but one could see
that he was feeling it pretty sharply. He's had three months to
think it over, remember. The Squire, I should guess, is showing more
indignation. He is boiling over, that any one should reject his son!
The enormity of the sin never seems to have been apparent to him
till now, when he sees how Roger is affected by it. Indeed, with the
exception of myself, I don't know one reasonable father; eh, Molly?"

Whatever else Mr. Henderson might be, he was an impatient lover; he
wanted to marry Cynthia directly--next week--the week after; at any
rate before the long vacation, so that they could go abroad at once.
Trousseaux, and preliminary ceremonies, he gave to the winds. Mr.
Gibson, generous as usual, called Cynthia aside a morning or two
after her engagement, and put a hundred-pound note into her hands.

"There! that's to pay your expenses to Russia and back. I hope you'll
find your pupils obedient."

To his surprise, and rather to his discomfiture, Cynthia threw her
arms round his neck and kissed him.

"You are the kindest person I know," said she; "and I don't know how
to thank you in words."

"If you tumble my shirt-collars again in that way, I'll charge you
for the washing. Just now, too, when I'm trying so hard to be trim
and elegant, like your Mr. Henderson."

"But you do like him, don't you?" said Cynthia, pleadingly. "He does
so like you."

"Of course. We're all angels just now, and you're an arch-angel. I
hope he'll wear as well as Roger."

Cynthia looked grave. "That was a very silly affair," she said. "We
were two as unsuitable people--"

"It has ended, and that's enough. Besides, I've no more time to
waste; and there's your smart young man coming here in all haste."

Mr. and Mrs. Kirkpatrick sent all manner of congratulations; and
Mrs. Gibson, in a private letter, assured Mrs. Kirkpatrick that
her ill-timed confidence about Roger should be considered as quite
private. For as soon as Mr. Henderson had made his appearance in
Hollingford, she had written a second letter, entreating them not to
allude to anything she might have said in her first; which she said
was written in such excitement on discovering the real state of her
daughter's affections, that she had hardly known what she had said,
and had exaggerated some things, and misunderstood others: all
that she did know now was, that Mr. Henderson had just proposed to
Cynthia, and was accepted, and that they were as happy as the day
was long, and ("excuse the vanity of a mother,") made a most lovely
couple. So Mr. and Mrs. Kirkpatrick wrote back an equally agreeable
letter, praising Mr. Henderson, admiring Cynthia, and generally
congratulatory; insisting into the bargain that the marriage should
take place from their house in Hyde Park Street, and that Mr. and
Mrs. Gibson and Molly should all come up and pay them a visit. There
was a little postscript at the end. "Surely you do not mean the
famous traveller, Hamley, about whose discoveries all our scientific
men are so much excited. You speak of him as a young Hamley, who went
to Africa. Answer this question, pray, for Helen is most anxious to
know." This P.S. being in Helen's handwriting. In her exultation
at the general success of everything, and desire for sympathy, Mrs.
Gibson read parts of this letter to Molly; the postscript among the
rest. It made a deeper impression on Molly than even the proposed
kindness of the visit to London.

There were some family consultations; but the end of them all was
that the Kirkpatrick invitation was accepted. There were many small
reasons for this, which were openly acknowledged; but there was
one general and unspoken wish to have the ceremony performed out
of the immediate neighbourhood of the two men whom Cynthia had
previously--rejected; that was the word now to be applied to her
treatment of them. So Molly was ordered and enjoined and entreated
to become strong as soon as possible, in order that her health might
not prevent her attending the marriage; Mr. Gibson himself, though he
thought it his duty to damp the exultant anticipations of his wife
and her daughter, being not at all averse to the prospect of going
to London, and seeing half-a-dozen old friends, and many scientific
exhibitions, independently of the very fair amount of liking which he
had for his host, Mr. Kirkpatrick himself.




CHAPTER LVII.

BRIDAL VISITS AND ADIEUX.


The whole town of Hollingford came to congratulate and inquire into
particulars. Some indeed--Mrs. Goodenough at the head of this class
of malcontents--thought that they were defrauded of their right to
a fine show by Cynthia's being married in London. Even Lady Cumnor
was moved into action. She, who had hardly ever paid calls "out of
her own sphere," who had only once been to see "Clare" in her own
house--she came to congratulate after her fashion. Maria had only
just time to run up into the drawing-room one morning, and say,--

"Please, ma'am, the great carriage from the Towers is coming up to
the gate, and my lady the Countess is sitting inside." It was but
eleven o'clock, and Mrs. Gibson would have been indignant at any
commoner who had ventured to call at such an untimely hour, but in
the case of the Peerage the rules of domestic morality were relaxed.

The family "stood at arms," as it were, till Lady Cumnor appeared in
the drawing-room; and then she had to be settled in the best chair,
and the light adjusted before anything like conversation began. She
was the first to speak; and Lady Harriet, who had begun a few words
to Molly, dropped into silence.

"I have been taking Mary--Lady Cuxhaven--to the railway station on
this new line between Birmingham and London, and I thought I would
come on here, and offer you my congratulations. Clare, which is
the young lady?"--putting up her glasses, and looking at Cynthia
and Molly, who were dressed pretty much alike. "I did not think it
would be amiss to give you a little advice, my dear," said she, when
Cynthia had been properly pointed out to her as bride elect. "I
have heard a good deal about you; and I am only too glad, for your
mother's sake,--your mother is a very worthy woman, and did her duty
very well while she was in our family--I am truly rejoiced, I say,
to hear that you are going to make so creditable a marriage. I hope
it will efface your former errors of conduct--which, we will hope,
were but trivial in reality--and that you will live to be a comfort
to your mother,--for whom both Lord Cumnor and I entertain a very
sincere regard. But you must conduct yourself with discretion in
whatever state of life it pleases God to place you, whether married
or single. You must reverence your husband, and conform to his
opinion in all things. Look up to him as your head, and do nothing
without consulting him."--It was as well that Lord Cumnor was
not amongst the audience; or he might have compared precept with
practice.--"Keep strict accounts; and remember your station in life.
I understand that Mr.--" looking about for some help as to the name
she had forgotten--"Anderson--Henderson is in the law. Although there
is a general prejudice against attorneys, I have known of two or
three who were very respectable men; and I am sure Mr. Henderson is
one, or your good mother and our old friend Gibson would not have
sanctioned the engagement."

"He is a barrister," put in Cynthia, unable to restrain herself any
longer. "Barrister-at-law."

"Ah, yes. Attorney-at-law. Barrister-at-law. I understand without
your speaking so loud, my dear. What was I going to say before you
interrupted me? When you have been a little in society you will find
that it is reckoned bad manners to interrupt. I had a great deal more
to say to you, and you have put it all out of my head. There was
something else your father wanted me to ask--what was it, Harriet?"

"I suppose you mean about Mr. Hamley?"

"Oh, yes! we are intending to have the house full of Lord
Hollingford's friends next month, and Lord Cumnor is particularly
anxious to secure Mr. Hamley."

"The Squire?" asked Mrs. Gibson in some surprise. Lady Cumnor bowed
slightly, as much as to say, "If you did not interrupt me I should
explain."

"The famous traveller--the scientific Mr. Hamley, I mean. I imagine
he is son to the Squire. Lord Hollingford knows him well; but when we
asked him before, he declined coming, and assigned no reason."

Had Roger indeed been asked to the Towers and declined? Mrs. Gibson
could not understand it. Lady Cumnor went on--

"Now this time we are particularly anxious to secure him, and my
son Lord Hollingford will not return to England until the very week
before the Duke of Atherstone is coming to us. I believe Mr. Gibson
is very intimate with Mr. Hamley; do you think he could induce him to
favour us with his company?"

And this from the proud Lady Cumnor; and the object of it Roger
Hamley, whom she had all but turned out of her drawing-room two years
ago for calling at an untimely hour; and whom Cynthia had turned out
of her heart. Mrs. Gibson was surprised, and could only murmur out
that she was sure Mr. Gibson would do all that her ladyship wished.

"Thank you. You know me well enough to be aware that I am not the
person, nor is the Towers the house, to go about soliciting guests.
But in this instance I bend my head; high rank should always be the
first to honour those who have distinguished themselves by art or
science."

"Besides, mamma," said Lady Harriet, "papa was saying that the
Hamleys have been on their land since before the Conquest; while we
only came into the county a century ago; and there is a tale that
the first Cumnor began his fortune through selling tobacco in King
James's reign."

If Lady Cumnor did not exactly shift her trumpet and take snuff
there on the spot, she behaved in an equivalent manner. She began
a low-toned but nevertheless authoritative conversation with Clare
about the details of the wedding, which lasted until she thought it
fit to go, when she abruptly plucked Lady Harriet up, and carried
her off in the very midst of a description she was giving to Cynthia
about the delights of Spa, which was to be one of the resting-places
of the newly-married couple on their wedding-tour.

Nevertheless she prepared a handsome present for the bride: a Bible
and a Prayer-book bound in velvet with silver-clasps; and also a
collection of household account-books, at the beginning of which Lady
Cumnor wrote down with her own hand the proper weekly allowance of
bread, butter, eggs, meat, and groceries per head, with the London
prices of the articles, so that the most inexperienced housekeeper
might ascertain whether her expenditure exceeded her means, as she
expressed herself in the note which she sent with the handsome, dull
present.

"If you are driving into Hollingford, Harriet, perhaps you will take
these books to Miss Kirkpatrick," said Lady Cumnor, after she had
sealed her note with all the straightness and correctness befitting
a countess of her immaculate character. "I understand they are
all going up to London to-morrow for this wedding, in spite of
what I said to Clare of the duty of being married in one's own
parish-church. She told me at the time that she entirely agreed
with me, but that her husband had such a strong wish for a visit to
London, that she did not know how she could oppose him consistently
with her wifely duty. I advised her to repeat to him my reasons for
thinking that they would be ill-advised to have the marriage in town;
but I am afraid she has been overruled. That was her one great fault
when she lived with us; she was always so yielding, and never knew
how to say 'No.'"

"Mamma!" said Lady Harriet, with a little sly coaxing in her tone.
"Do you think you would have been so fond of her, if she had opposed
you, and said 'No,' when you wished her to say 'Yes?'"

"To be sure I should, my dear. I like everybody to have an opinion of
their own; only when my opinions are based on thought and experience,
which few people have had equal opportunities of acquiring, I think
it is but proper deference in others to allow themselves to be
convinced. In fact, I think it is only obstinacy which keeps them
from acknowledging that they are. I am not a despot, I hope?" she
asked, with some anxiety.

"If you are, dear mamma," said Lady Harriet, kissing the stern
uplifted face very fondly, "I like a despotism better than a
republic, and I must be very despotic over my ponies, for it's
already getting very late for my drive round by Ash-holt."

But when she arrived at the Gibsons', she was detained so long there
by the state of the family, that she had to give up her going to
Ash-holt.

Molly was sitting in the drawing-room pale and trembling, and keeping
herself quiet only by a strong effort. She was the only person there
when Lady Harriet entered: the room was all in disorder, strewed with
presents and paper, and pasteboard boxes, and half-displayed articles
of finery.

"You look like Marius sitting amidst the ruins of Carthage, my dear!
What's the matter? Why have you got on that wobegone face? This
marriage isn't broken off, is it? Though nothing would surprise me
where the beautiful Cynthia is concerned."

"Oh, no! that's all right. But I have caught a fresh cold, and papa
says he thinks I had better not go to the wedding."

"Poor little one! And it's the first visit to London too!"

"Yes. But what I most care for is the not being with Cynthia to
the last; and then, papa"--she stopped, for she could hardly go
on without open crying, and she did not want to do that. Then she
cleared her voice. "Papa," she continued, "has so looked forward to
this holiday,--and seeing--and--, and going--oh! I can't tell you
where; but he has quite a list of people and sights to be seen,--and
now he says he should not be comfortable to leave me all alone for
more than three days,--two for travelling, and one for the wedding."
Just then Mrs. Gibson came in, ruffled too after her fashion, though
the presence of Lady Harriet was wonderfully smoothing.

"My dear Lady Harriet--how kind of you! Ah, yes, I see this poor
unfortunate child has been telling you of her ill-luck; just when
everything was going on so beautifully; I'm sure it was that open
window at your back, Molly,--you know you would persist that it could
do you no harm, and now you see the mischief! I'm sure I shan't be
able to enjoy myself--and at my only child's wedding too--without
you; for I can't think of leaving you without Maria. I would rather
sacrifice anything myself than think of you, uncared for, and dismal
at home."

"I am sure Molly is as sorry as any one," said Lady Harriet.

"No. I don't think she is," said Mrs. Gibson, with happy disregard of
the chronology of events, "or she would not have sate with her back
to an open window the day before yesterday, when I told her not. But
it can't be helped now. Papa too--but it is my duty to make the best
of everything, and look at the cheerful side of life. I wish I could
persuade her to do the same" (turning and addressing Lady Harriet).
"But, you see, it is a great mortification to a girl of her age to
lose her first visit to London."

"It is not that," began Molly; but Lady Harriet made her a little
sign to be silent while she herself spoke.

"Now, Clare! you and I can manage it all, I think, if you will but
help me in a plan I've got in my head. Mr. Gibson shall stay as long
as ever he can in London; and Molly shall be well cared for, and have
some change of air and scene too, which is really what she needs
as much as anything, in my poor opinion. I can't spirit her to the
wedding and give her a sight of London; but I can carry her off to
the Towers, and nurse her myself; and send daily bulletins up to
London, so that Mr. Gibson may feel quite at ease, and stay with you
as long as you like. What do you say to it, Clare?"

"Oh, I could not go," said Molly; "I should only be a trouble to
everybody."

"Nobody asked you for your opinion, little one. If we wise elders
decide that you are to go, you must submit in silence."

Meanwhile Mrs. Gibson was rapidly balancing advantages and
disadvantages. Amongst the latter, jealousy came in predominant.
Amongst the former,--it would sound well; Maria could then accompany
Cynthia and herself as "their maid;" Mr. Gibson would stay longer
with her, and it was always desirable to have a man at her beck and
call in such a place as London; besides that, this identical man was
gentlemanly and good-looking, and a favourite with her prosperous
brother-in-law. The "ayes" had it.

"What a charming plan! I cannot think of anything kinder or
pleasanter for this poor darling. Only--what will Lady Cumnor say? I
am modest for my family as much as for myself. She won't--"

"You know mamma's sense of hospitality is never more gratified than
when the house is quite full; and papa is just like her. Besides, she
is fond of you, and grateful to our good Mr. Gibson, and will be fond
of you, little one, when she knows you as I do."

Molly's heart sank within her at the prospect. Except on the one
evening of her father's wedding-day, she had never even seen the
outside of the Towers since that unlucky day in her childhood
when she had fallen asleep on Clare's bed. She had a dread of the
countess, a dislike to the house; only it seemed as if it was a
solution to the problem of what to do with her, which had been
perplexing every one all morning, and so evidently that it had
caused her much distress. She kept silence, though her lips quivered
from time to time. Oh, if Miss Brownings had not chosen this very
time of all others to pay their monthly visit to Miss Hornblower!
If she could only have gone there, and lived with them in their
quaint, quiet, primitive way, instead of having to listen, without
remonstrance, to hearing plans discussed about her, as if she was an
inanimate chattel!

"She shall have the south pink room, opening out of mine by one door,
you remember; and the dressing-room shall be made into a cosy little
sitting-room for her, in case she likes to be by herself. Parkes
shall attend upon her, and I'm sure Mr. Gibson must know Parkes's
powers as a nurse by this time. We shall have all manner of agreeable
people in the house to amuse her downstairs; and when she has got rid
of this access of cold, I will drive her out every day, and write
daily bulletins, as I said. Pray tell Mr. Gibson all that, and let it
be considered as settled. I will come for her in the close carriage
to-morrow, at eleven. And now may I see the lovely bride-elect, and
give her mamma's present, and my own good wishes?"

So Cynthia came in, and demurely received the very proper present,
and the equally correct congratulations, without testifying any very
great delight or gratitude at either; for she was quite quick enough
to detect there was no great afflux of affection accompanying either.
But when she heard her mother quickly recapitulating all the details
of the plan for Molly, Cynthia's eyes did sparkle with gladness; and
almost to Lady Harriet's surprise, she thanked her as if she had
conferred a personal favour upon her, Cynthia. Lady Harriet saw,
too, that in a very quiet way, she had taken Molly's hand, and was
holding it all the time, as if loth to think of their approaching
separation--somehow, she and Lady Harriet were brought nearer
together by this little action than they had ever been before.

If Molly had hoped that her father might have raised some obstacles
to the project, she was disappointed. But, indeed, she was satisfied
when she perceived how he seemed to feel that, by placing her under
the care of Lady Harriet and Parkes, he should be relieved from
anxiety; and how he spoke of this change of air and scene as being
the very thing he had been wishing to secure for her; country air,
and absence of excitement as this would be; for the only other place
where he could have secured her these advantages, and at the same
time sent her as an invalid, was to Hamley Hall; and he dreaded the
associations there with the beginning of her present illness.

So Molly was driven off in state the next day, leaving her own home
all in confusion with the assemblage of boxes and trunks in the hall,
and all the other symptoms of the approaching departure of the family
for London and the wedding. All the morning Cynthia had been with
her in her room, attending to the arrangement of Molly's clothes,
instructing her what to wear with what, and rejoicing over the pretty
smartnesses, which, having been prepared for her as bridesmaid, were
now to serve as adornments for her visit to the Towers. Both Molly
and Cynthia spoke about dress as if it was the very object of their
lives; for each dreaded the introduction of more serious subjects;
Cynthia more for Molly than herself. Only when the carriage was
announced, and Molly was preparing to go downstairs, Cynthia said,--

"I am not going to thank you, Molly, or to tell you how I love you."

"Don't," said Molly, "I can't bear it."

"Only you know you are to be my first visitor, and if you wear brown
ribbons to a green gown, I'll turn you out of the house!" So they
parted. Mr. Gibson was there in the hall to hand Molly in. He had
ridden hard; and was now giving her two or three last injunctions as
to her health.

"Think of us on Thursday," said he. "I declare I don't know which of
her three lovers she mayn't summon at the very last moment to act the
part of bridegroom. I'm determined to be surprised at nothing; and
will give her away with a good grace to whoever comes."

They drove away, and until they were out of sight of the house, Molly
had enough to do to keep returning the kisses of the hand wafted to
her by her stepmother out of the drawing-room window, while at the
same time her eyes were fixed on a white handkerchief fluttering out
of the attic from which she herself had watched Roger's departure
nearly two years before. What changes time had brought!

When Molly arrived at the Towers she was convoyed into Lady Cumnor's
presence by Lady Harriet. It was a mark of respect to the lady of the
house, which the latter knew that her mother would expect; but she
was anxious to get it over, and take Molly up into the room which she
had been so busy arranging for her. Lady Cumnor was, however, very
kind, if not positively gracious.

"You are Lady Harriet's visitor, my dear," said she, "and I hope she
will take good care of you. If not, come and complain of her to me."
It was as near an approach to a joke as Lady Cumnor ever perpetrated,
and from it Lady Harriet knew that her mother was pleased by Molly's
manners and appearance.

"Now, here you are in your own kingdom; and into this room I shan't
venture to come without express permission. Here is the last new
_Quarterly_, and the last new novel, and the last new Essays. Now, my
dear, you needn't come down again to-day unless you like it. Parkes
shall bring you everything and anything you want. You must get strong
as fast as you can, for all sorts of great and famous people are
coming to-morrow and the next day, and I think you'll like to see
them. Suppose for to-day you only come down to lunch, and if you
like it, in the evening. Dinner is such a wearily long meal, if one
isn't strong; and you wouldn't miss much, for there's only my cousin
Charles in the house now, and he is the personification of sensible
silence."

Molly was only too glad to allow Lady Harriet to decide everything
for her. It had begun to rain, and was altogether a gloomy day for
August; and there was a small fire of scented wood burning cheerfully
in the sitting-room appropriated to her. High up, it commanded a
wide and pleasant view over the park, and from it could be seen the
spire of Hollingford Church, which gave Molly a pleasant idea of
neighbourhood to home. She was left alone, lying on the sofa--books
near her, wood crackling and blazing, wafts of wind bringing the
beating rain against the window, and so enhancing the sense of indoor
comfort by the outdoor contrast. Parkes was unpacking for her. Lady
Harriet had introduced Parkes to Molly by saying, "Now, Molly, this
is Mrs. Parkes, the only person I am ever afraid of. She scolds me if
I dirty myself with my paints, just as if I was a little child; and
she makes me go to bed when I want to sit up,"--Parkes was smiling
grimly all the time;--"so to get rid of her tyranny I give her you as
victim. Parkes, rule over Miss Gibson with a rod of iron; make her
eat and drink, and rest and sleep, and dress as you think wisest and
best."

Parkes had begun her reign by putting Molly on the sofa, and saying,
"If you will give me your keys, Miss, I will unpack your things, and
let you know when it is time for me to arrange your hair, preparatory
to luncheon." For if Lady Harriet used familiar colloquialisms from
time to time, she certainly had not learnt it from Parkes, who piqued
herself on the correctness of her language.

When Molly went down to lunch she found "cousin Charles," with his
aunt, Lady Cumnor. He was a certain Sir Charles Morton, the son of
Lady Cumnor's only sister: a plain, sandy-haired man of thirty-five
or so; immensely rich, very sensible, awkward, and reserved. He had
had a chronic attachment, of many years' standing, to his cousin,
Lady Harriet, who did not care for him in the least, although it
was the marriage very earnestly desired for her by her mother. Lady
Harriet was, however, on friendly terms with him, ordered him about,
and told him what to do, and what to leave undone, without having
even a doubt as to the willingness of his obedience. She had given
him his cue about Molly.

"Now, Charles, the girl wants to be interested and amused without
having to take any trouble for herself; she is too delicate to be
very active either in mind or body. Just look after her when the
house gets full, and place her where she can hear and see everything
and everybody, without any fuss and responsibility."

So Sir Charles began this day at luncheon by taking Molly under his
quiet protection. He did not say much to her; but what he did say was
thoroughly friendly and sympathetic; and Molly began, as he and Lady
Harriet intended that she should, to have a kind of pleasant reliance
upon him. Then in the evening while the rest of the family were at
dinner--after Molly's tea and hour of quiet repose, Parkes came and
dressed her in some of the new clothes prepared for the Kirkpatrick
visit, and did her hair in some new and pretty way, so that when
Molly looked at herself in the cheval-glass, she scarcely knew the
elegant reflection to be that of herself. She was fetched down by
Lady Harriet into the great long formidable drawing-room, which as
an interminable place of pacing, had haunted her dreams ever since
her childhood. At the further end sat Lady Cumnor at her tapestry
work; the light of fire and candle seemed all concentrated on that
one bright part where presently Lady Harriet made tea, and Lord
Cumnor went to sleep, and Sir Charles read passages aloud from the
_Edinburgh Review_ to the three ladies at their work.

When Molly went to bed she was constrained to admit that staying at
the Towers as a visitor was rather pleasant than otherwise; and she
tried to reconcile old impressions with new ones, until she fell
asleep. There was another comparatively quiet day before the expected
guests began to arrive in the evening. Lady Harriet took Molly a
drive in her little pony-carriage; and for the first time for many
weeks Molly began to feel the delightful spring of returning health;
the dance of youthful spirits in the fresh air cleared by the
previous day's rain.




CHAPTER LVIII.

REVIVING HOPES AND BRIGHTENING PROSPECTS.


"If you can without fatigue, dear, do come down to dinner to-day;
you'll then see the people one by one as they appear, instead of
having to encounter a crowd of strangers. Hollingford will be here
too. I hope you'll find it pleasant."

So Molly made her appearance at dinner that day; and got to know, by
sight at least, some of the most distinguished of the visitors at the
Towers. The next day was Thursday, Cynthia's wedding-day; bright and
fine in the country, whatever it might be in London. And there were
several letters from the home-people awaiting Molly when she came
downstairs to the late breakfast. For, every day, every hour, she was
gaining strength and health, and she was unwilling to continue her
invalid habits any longer than was necessary. She looked so much
better that Sir Charles noticed it to Lady Harriet; and several of
the visitors spoke of her this morning as a very pretty, lady-like,
and graceful girl. This was Thursday; on Friday, as Lady Harriet had
told her, some visitors from the more immediate neighbourhood were
expected to stay over the Sunday; but she had not mentioned their
names, and when Molly went down into the drawing-room before dinner,
she was almost startled by perceiving Roger Hamley in the centre of
a group of gentlemen, who were all talking together eagerly, and, as
it seemed to her, making him the object of their attention. He made
a hitch in his conversation, lost the precise meaning of a question
addressed to him, answered it rather hastily, and made his way
to where Molly was sitting, a little behind Lady Harriet. He had
heard that she was staying at the Towers, but he was almost as much
surprised by hers, as she was by his unexpected appearance, for he
had only seen her once or twice since his return from Africa, and
then in the guise of an invalid. Now in her pretty evening dress,
with her hair beautifully dressed, her delicate complexion flushed a
little with timidity, yet her movements and manners bespeaking quiet
ease, Roger hardly recognized her, although he acknowledged her
identity. He began to feel that admiring deference which most young
men experience when conversing with a very pretty girl: a sort of
desire to obtain her good opinion in a manner very different to his
old familiar friendliness. He was annoyed when Sir Charles, whose
especial charge she still was, came up to take her in to dinner. He
could not quite understand the smile of mutual intelligence that
passed between the two, each being aware of Lady Harriet's plan
of sheltering Molly from the necessity of talking, and acting in
conformity with her wishes as much as with their own. Roger found
himself puzzling, and watching them from time to time during
dinner. Again in the evening he sought her out, but found her again
pre-occupied with one of the young men staying in the house, who had
had the advantage of two days of mutual interest, and acquaintance
with the daily events and jokes and anxieties of the family circle.
Molly could not help wishing to break off all this trivial talk and
to make room for Roger: she had so much to ask him about everything
at the Hall; he was, and had been such a stranger to them all for
these last two months, and more. But though each wanted to speak to
the other more than to any one else in the room, it so happened that
everything seemed to conspire to prevent it. Lord Hollingford carried
off Roger to the cluster of middle-aged men; he was wanted to give
his opinion upon some scientific subject. Mr. Ernulphus Watson,
the young man referred to above, kept his place by Molly, as the
prettiest girl in the room, and almost dazed her by his never-ceasing
flow of clever small-talk. She looked so tired and pale at last that
the ever-watchful Lady Harriet sent Sir Charles to the rescue, and
after a few words with Lady Harriet, Roger saw Molly quietly leave
the room; and a sentence or two which he heard Lady Harriet address
to her cousin made him know that it was for the night. Those
sentences might bear another interpretation than the obvious one.

"Really, Charles, considering that she is in your charge, I think you
might have saved her from the chatter and patter of Mr. Watson; I can
only stand it when I am in the strongest health."

Why was Molly in Sir Charles's charge? why? Then Roger remembered
many little things that might serve to confirm the fancy he had got
into his head; and he went to bed puzzled and annoyed. It seemed
to him such an incongruous, hastily-got-up sort of engagement, if
engagement it really was. On Saturday they were more fortunate: they
had a long _tÉte-ł-tÉte_ in the most public place in the house--on a
sofa in the hall where Molly was resting at Lady Harriet's command
before going upstairs after a walk. Roger was passing through, and
saw her, and came to her. Standing before her, and making pretence of
playing with the gold-fish in a great marble basin close at hand,--

"I was very unlucky," said he. "I wanted to get near you last night,
but it was quite impossible. You were so busy talking to Mr. Watson,
until Sir Charles Morton came and carried you off--with such an air
of authority! Have you known him long?"

Now this was not at all the manner in which Roger had pre-determined
that he would speak of Sir Charles to Molly; but the words came out
in spite of himself.

"No! not long. I never saw him before I came here--on Tuesday. But
Lady Harriet told him to see that I did not get tired, for I wanted
to come down; but you know I have not been strong. He is a cousin of
Lady Harriet's, and does all she tells him to do."

"Oh! he is not handsome; but I believe he is a very sensible man."

"Yes! I should think so. He is so silent though, that I can hardly
judge."

"He bears a very high character in the county," said Roger, willing
now to give him his full due.

Molly stood up.

"I must go upstairs," she said; "I only sate down here for a minute
or two because Lady Harriet bade me."

"Stop a little longer," said he. "This is really the pleasantest
place; this basin of water-lilies gives one the idea, if not the
sensation, of coolness; besides--it seems so long since I saw you,
and I have a message from my father to give you. He is very angry
with you."

"Angry with me?" said Molly in surprise.

"Yes! He heard that you had come here for change of air; and he was
offended that you hadn't come to us--to the Hall, instead. He said
that you should have remembered old friends!"

Molly took all this quite gravely, and did not at first notice the
smile on his face.

"Oh! I am so sorry!" said she. "But will you please tell him how it
all happened. Lady Harriet called the very day when it was settled
that I was not to go to--" Cynthia's wedding, she was going to add,
but she suddenly stopped short, and, blushing deeply, changed the
expression, "go to London, and she planned it all in a minute, and
convinced mamma and papa, and had her own way. There was really no
resisting her."

"I think you will have to tell all this to my father yourself if you
mean to make your peace. Why can you not come on to the Hall when you
leave the Towers?"

To go in the cool manner suggested from one house to another, after
the manner of a royal progress, was not at all according to Molly's
primitive home-keeping notions. She made answer,--

"I should like it very much, some time. But I must go home first.
They will want me more than ever now--"

Again she felt herself touching on a sore subject, and stopped short.
Roger became annoyed at her so constantly conjecturing what he must
be feeling on the subject of Cynthia's marriage. With sympathetic
perception she had discerned that the idea must give him pain; and
perhaps she also knew that he would dislike to show the pain; but she
had not the presence of mind or ready wit to give a skilful turn to
the conversation. All this annoyed Roger, he could hardly tell why.
He determined to take the metaphorical bull by the horns. Until that
was done, his footing with Molly would always be insecure; as it
always is between two friends, who mutually avoid a subject to which
their thoughts perpetually recur.

"Ah, yes!" said he. "Of course you must be of double importance now
Miss Kirkpatrick has left you. I saw her marriage in _The Times_
yesterday."

His tone of voice was changed in speaking of her, but her name had
been named between them, and that was the great thing to accomplish.

"Still," he continued, "I think I must urge my father's claim for a
short visit, and all the more, because I can really see the apparent
improvement in your health since I came,--only yesterday. Besides,
Molly," it was the old familiar Roger of former days who spoke now,
"I think you could help us at home. AimÄe is shy and awkward with my
father, and he has never taken quite kindly to her,--yet I know they
would like and value each other, if some one could but bring them
together,--and it would be such a comfort to me if this could take
place before I have to leave."

"To leave--are you going away again?"

"Yes. Have you not heard? I didn't complete my engagement. I'm going
again in September for six months."

"I remember. But somehow I fancied--you seemed to have settled down
into the old ways at the Hall."

"So my father appears to think. But it is not likely I shall ever
make it my home again; and that is partly the reason why I want my
father to adopt the notion of AimÄe's living with him. Ah, here are
all the people coming back from their walk. However, I shall see you
again; perhaps this afternoon we may get a little quiet time, for I
have a great deal to consult you about."

They separated then, and Molly went upstairs very happy, very full
and warm at her heart; it was so pleasant to have Roger talking to
her in this way, like a friend; she had once thought that she could
never look upon the great brown-bearded celebrity in the former light
of almost brotherly intimacy, but now it was all coming right. There
was no opportunity for renewed confidences that afternoon. Molly went
a quiet decorous drive as fourth with two dowagers and one spinster;
but it was very pleasant to think that she should see him again at
dinner, and again to-morrow. On the Sunday evening, as they all were
sitting and loitering on the lawn before dinner, Roger went on with
what he had to say about the position of his sister-in-law in his
father's house: the mutual bond between the mother and grandfather
being the child; who was also, through jealousy, the bone of
contention and the severance. There were many little details to be
given in order to make Molly quite understand the difficulty of the
situations on both sides; and the young man and the girl became
absorbed in what they were talking about, and wandered away into the
shade of the long avenue. Lady Harriet separated herself from a group
and came up to Lord Hollingford, who was sauntering a little apart,
and putting her arm within his with the familiarity of a favourite
sister, she said,--

"Don't you think that your pattern young man, and my favourite young
woman, are finding out each other's good qualities?"

He had not been observing as she had been.

"Who do you mean?" said he.

"Look along the avenue; who are those?"

"Mr. Hamley and--is it not Miss Gibson? I can't quite make out. Oh!
if you're letting your fancy run off in that direction, I can tell
you it's quite waste of time. Roger Hamley is a man who will soon
have an European reputation!"

"That's very possible, and yet it doesn't make any difference in my
opinion. Molly Gibson is capable of appreciating him."

"She is a very pretty, good little country-girl. I don't mean to say
anything against her, but--"

"Remember the Charity Ball; you called her 'unusually intelligent'
after you had danced with her there. But, after all, we are like
the genie and the fairy in the _Arabian Nights' Entertainment_, who
each cried up the merits of the Prince Caramalzaman and the Princess
Badoura."

"Hamley is not a marrying man."

"How do you know?"

"I know that he has very little private fortune, and I know that
science is not a remunerative profession, if profession it can be
called."

"Oh, if that's all--a hundred things may happen--some one may leave
him a fortune--or this tiresome little heir that nobody wanted, may
die."

"Hush, Harriet, that's the worst of allowing yourself to plan far
ahead for the future; you are sure to contemplate the death of some
one, and to reckon upon the contingency as affecting events."

"As if lawyers were not always doing something of the kind!"

"Leave it to those to whom it is necessary. I dislike planning
marriages or looking forward to deaths about equally."

"You are getting very prosaic and tiresome, Hollingford!"

"Only getting!" said he smiling; "I thought you had always looked
upon me as a tiresome matter-of-fact fellow."

"Now, if you're going to fish for a compliment I am gone. Only
remember my prophecy when my vision comes to pass; or make a bet,
and whoever wins shall spend the money on a present to Prince
Caramalzaman or Princess Badoura, as the case may be."

Lord Hollingford remembered his sister's words as he heard Roger say
to Molly as he was leaving the Towers on the following day,--

"Then I may tell my father that you will come and pay him a visit
next week? You don't know what pleasure it will give him." He had
been on the point of saying "will give _us_," but he had an instinct
which told him it was as well to consider Molly's promised visit as
exclusively made to his father.

The next day Molly went home; she was astonished at herself for
being so sorry to leave the Towers; and found it difficult, if not
impossible, to reconcile the long-fixed idea of the house as a place
wherein to suffer all a child's tortures of dismay and forlornness
with her new and fresh conception. She had gained health, she had
had pleasure, the faint fragrance of a new and unacknowledged hope
had stolen into her life. No wonder that Mr. Gibson was struck with
the improvement in her looks, and Mrs. Gibson impressed with her
increased grace.

"Ah, Molly," said she, "it's really wonderful to see what a little
good society will do for a girl. Even a week of association with such
people as one meets with at the Towers is, as somebody said of a
lady of rank whose name I have forgotten, 'a polite education in
itself.' There is something quite different about you--a _je ne
sais quoi_--that would tell me at once that you have been mingling
with the aristocracy. With all her charms, it was what my darling
Cynthia wanted; not that Mr. Henderson thought so, for a more devoted
lover can hardly be conceived. He absolutely bought her a parure of
diamonds. I was obliged to say to him that I had studied to preserve
her simplicity of taste, and that he must not corrupt her with too
much luxury. But I was rather disappointed at their going off without
a maid. It was the one blemish in the arrangements--the spot in the
sun. Dear Cynthia, when I think of her, I do assure you, Molly, I
make it my nightly prayer that I may be able to find you just such
another husband. And all this time you have never told me who you met
at the Towers?"

Molly ran over a list of names. Roger Hamley's came last.

"Upon my word! That young man is pushing his way up!"

"The Hamleys are a far older family than the Cumnors," said Molly,
flushing up.

"Now, Molly, I can't have you democratic. Rank is a great
distinction. It is quite enough to have dear papa with democratic
tendencies. But we won't begin to quarrel. Now that you and I are
left alone, we ought to be bosom friends, and I hope we shall be.
Roger Hamley did not say much about that unfortunate little Osborne
Hamley, I suppose?"

"On the contrary, he says his father dotes on the child; and he
seemed very proud of him, himself."

"I thought the Squire must be getting very much infatuated with
something. I daresay the French mother takes care of that. Why! he
has scarcely taken any notice of you for this month or more, and
before that you were everything."

It was about six weeks since Cynthia's engagement had become publicly
known, and that might have had something to do with the Squire's
desertion, Molly thought. But she said,--

"The Squire has sent me an invitation to go and stay there next week
if you have no objection, mamma. They seem to want a companion for
Mrs. Osborne Hamley, who is not very strong."

"I can hardly tell what to say,--I don't like your having to
associate with a Frenchwoman of doubtful rank; and I can't bear the
thought of losing my child--my only daughter now. I did ask Helen
Kirkpatrick, but she can't come for some time; and the house is going
to be altered. Papa has consented to build me another room at last,
for Cynthia and Mr. Henderson will, of course, come and see us;
we shall have many more visitors, I expect, and your bedroom will
make a capital lumber-room; and Maria wants a week's holiday. I am
always so unwilling to put any obstacles in the way of any one's
pleasure,--weakly unwilling, I believe,--but it certainly would be
very convenient to have you out of the house for a few days; so, for
once, I will waive my own wish for your companionship, and plead your
cause with papa."

Miss Brownings came to call and hear the double batch of news. Mrs.
Goodenough had called the very day on which they had returned from
Miss Hornblower's, to tell them the astounding fact of Molly Gibson
having gone on a visit to the Towers; not to come back at night, but
to sleep there, to be there for two or three days, just as if she
was a young lady of quality. So Miss Brownings came to hear all the
details of the wedding from Mrs. Gibson, and the history of Molly's
visit at the Towers as well. But Mrs. Gibson did not like this
divided interest, and some of her old jealousy of Molly's intimacy at
the Towers had returned.

"Now, Molly," said Miss Browning, "let us hear how you behaved among
the great folks. You must not be set up with all their attention;
remember that they pay it to you for your good father's sake."

"Molly is, I think, quite aware," put in Mrs. Gibson, in her most
soft and languid tone, "that she owes her privilege of visiting at
such a house to Lady Cumnor's kind desire to set my mind quite at
liberty at the time of Cynthia's marriage. As soon as ever I had
returned home, Molly came back; indeed, I should not have thought
it right to let her intrude upon their kindness beyond what was
absolutely necessary."

Molly felt extremely uncomfortable at all this, though perfectly
aware of the entire inaccuracy of the statement.

"Well, but, Molly!" said Miss Browning, "never mind whether you went
there on your own merits, or your worthy father's merits, or Mrs.
Gibson's merits; but tell us what you did when you were there."

So Molly began an account of their sayings and doings, which she
could have made far more interesting to Miss Browning and Miss
Phoebe if she had not been conscious of her stepmother's critical
listening. She had to tell it all with a mental squint; the surest
way to spoil a narration. She was also subject to Mrs. Gibson's
perpetual corrections of little statements which she knew to be
facts. But what vexed her most of all was Mrs. Gibson's last speech
before the Miss Brownings left.

"Molly has fallen into rambling ways with this visit of hers, of
which she makes so much, as if nobody had ever been in a great house
but herself. She is going to Hamley Hall next week,--getting quite
dissipated, in fact."

Yet to Mrs. Goodenough, the next caller on the same errand of
congratulation, Mrs. Gibson's tone was quite different. There had
always been a tacit antagonism between the two, and the conversation
now ran as follows:--

Mrs. Goodenough began,--

"Well! Mrs. Gibson, I suppose I must wish you joy of Miss Cynthia's
marriage; I should condole with some mothers as had lost their
daughters; but you're not one of that sort, I reckon."

Now, as Mrs. Gibson was not quite sure to which "sort" of mothers the
greatest credit was to be attached, she found it a little difficult
how to frame her reply.

"Dear Cynthia!" she said. "One can't but rejoice in her happiness!
And yet--" she ended her sentence by sighing.

"Ay. She was a young woman as would always have her followers; for,
to tell the truth, she was as pretty a creature as ever I saw in my
life. And all the more she needed skilful guidance. I'm sure I, for
one, am as glad as can be she's done so well by herself. Folks say
Mr. Henderson has a handsome private fortune over and above what he
makes by the law."

"There is no fear but that my Cynthia will have everything this world
can give!" said Mrs. Gibson with dignity.

"Well, well! she was always a bit of a favourite of mine; and as I
was saying to my grand-daughter there" (for she was accompanied by a
young lady, who looked keenly to the prospect of some wedding-cake),
"I was never one of those who ran her down and called her a flirt
and a jilt. I'm glad to hear she's like to be so well off. And now,
I suppose, you'll be turning your mind to doing something for Miss
Molly there?"

"If you mean by that, doing anything that can, by hastening her
marriage, deprive me of the company of one who is like my own child,
you are very much mistaken, Mrs. Goodenough. And pray remember,
I am the last person in the world to match-make. Cynthia made Mr.
Henderson's acquaintance at her uncle's in London."

"Ay! I thought her cousin was very often ill, and needing her
nursing, and you were very keen she should be of use. I'm not saying
but what it's right in a mother; I'm only putting in a word for Miss
Molly."

"Thank you, Mrs. Goodenough," said Molly, half-angry, half-laughing.
"When I want to be married, I'll not trouble mamma. I'll look out for
myself."

"Molly is becoming so popular, I hardly know how we shall keep her
at home," said Mrs. Gibson. "I miss her sadly; but, as I said to Mr.
Gibson, let young people have change, and see a little of the world
while they are young. It has been a great advantage to her being at
the Towers while so many clever and distinguished people were there.
I can already see a difference in her tone of conversation: an
elevation in her choice of subjects. And now she is going to Hamley
Hall. I can assure you I feel quite a proud mother, when I see how
she is sought after. And my other daughter--my Cynthia--writing such
letters from Paris!"

"Things is a deal changed since my days, for sure," said Mrs.
Goodenough. "So, perhaps, I'm no judge. When I was married first, him
and me went in a postchaise to his father's house, a matter of twenty
mile off at the outside; and sate down to as good a supper amongst
his friends and relations as you'd wish to see. And that was my first
wedding jaunt. My second was when I better knowed my worth as a
bride, and thought that now or never I must see London. But I were
reckoned a very extravagant sort of a body to go so far, and spend
my money, though Harry had left me uncommon well off. But now young
folks go off to Paris, and think nothing of the cost: and it's well
if wilful waste don't make woeful want before they die. But I'm
thankful somewhat is being done for Miss Molly's chances, as I said
afore. It's not quite what I should have liked to have done for my
Annabella though. But times are changed, as I said just now."




CHAPTER LIX.

MOLLY GIBSON AT HAMLEY HALL.


The conversation ended there for the time. Wedding-cake and wine were
brought in, and it was Molly's duty to serve them out. But those last
words of Mrs. Goodenough's tingled in her ears, and she tried to
interpret them to her own satisfaction in any way but the obvious
one. And that, too, was destined to be confirmed; for directly after
Mrs. Goodenough took her leave, Mrs. Gibson desired Molly to carry
away the tray to a table close to an open corner window, where the
things might be placed in readiness for any future callers; and
underneath this open window went the path from the house-door to the
road. Molly heard Mrs. Goodenough saying to her grand-daughter,--

"That Mrs. Gibson is a deep 'un. There's Mr. Roger Hamley as like as
not to have the Hall estate, and she sends Molly a-visiting--" and
then she passed out of hearing. Molly could have burst out crying,
with a full sudden conviction of what Mrs. Goodenough had been
alluding to: her sense of the impropriety of Molly's going to visit
at the Hall when Roger was at home. To be sure, Mrs. Goodenough was a
commonplace, unrefined woman. Mrs. Gibson did not seem to have even
noticed the allusion. Mr. Gibson took it all as a matter of course
that Molly should go to the Hall as simply now, as she had done
before. Roger had spoken of it in so straightforward a manner as
showed he had no conception of its being an impropriety,--this
visit,--this visit until now so happy a subject of anticipation.
Molly felt as if she could never speak to any one of the idea to
which Mrs. Goodenough's words had given rise; as if she could never
be the first to suggest the notion of impropriety, which presupposed
what she blushed to think of. Then she tried to comfort herself by
reasoning. If it had been wrong, forward, or indelicate, really
improper in the slightest degree, who would have been so ready as her
father to put his veto upon it? But reasoning was of no use after
Mrs. Goodenough's words had put fancies into Molly's head. The more
she bade these fancies begone the more they answered her (as Daniel
O'Rourke did the man in the moon, when he bade Dan get off his seat
on the sickle, and go into empty space):--"The more ye ask us the
more we won't stir." One may smile at a young girl's miseries of this
kind; but they are very real and stinging miseries to her. All that
Molly could do was to resolve on a single eye to the dear old Squire,
and his mental and bodily comforts; to try and heal up any breaches
which might have occurred between him and AimÄe; and to ignore Roger
as much as possible. Good Roger! Kind Roger! Dear Roger! It would
be very hard to avoid him as much as was consistent with common
politeness; but it would be right to do it; and when she was with
him she must be as natural as possible, or he might observe some
difference; but what was natural? How much ought she avoid being with
him? Would he even notice if she was more chary of her company, more
calculating of her words? Alas! the simplicity of their intercourse
was spoilt henceforwards! She made laws for herself; she resolved
to devote herself to the Squire and to AimÄe, and to forget Mrs.
Goodenough's foolish speeches; but her perfect freedom was gone; and
with it half her chance--that is to say, half her chance would have
been lost over any strangers who had not known her before; they would
probably have thought her stiff and awkward, and apt to say things
and then retract them. But she was so different from her usual self
that Roger noticed the change in her as soon as she arrived at the
Hall. She had carefully measured out the days of her visit; they were
to be exactly the same number as she had spent at the Towers. She
feared lest if she stayed at the Hall a shorter time the Squire might
be annoyed. Yet how charming the place looked in its early autumnal
glow as she drove up! And there was Roger at the hall-door, waiting
to receive her, watching for her coming. And now he retreated,
apparently to summon his sister-in-law, who came now timidly forwards
in her deep widow's mourning, holding her boy in her arms as if to
protect her shyness; but he struggled down, and ran towards the
carriage, eager to greet his friend the coachman, and to obtain a
promised ride. Roger did not say much himself; he wanted to make
AimÄe feel her place as daughter of the house; but she was too timid
to speak much. And she only took Molly by the hand and led her into
the drawing-room, where, as if by a sudden impulse of gratitude for
all the tender nursing she had received during her illness, she put
her arms round Molly and kissed her long and well. And after that
they came to be friends.

It was nearly lunch-time, and the Squire always made his appearance
at that meal, more for the pleasure of seeing his grandson eat his
dinner than for any hunger of his own. To-day Molly quickly saw the
whole state of the family affairs. She thought that even had Roger
said nothing about them at the Towers, she should have seen that
neither the father nor the daughter-in-law had as yet found the
clue to each other's characters, although they had now been living
for several months in the same house. AimÄe seemed to forget her
English in her nervousness; and to watch with the jealous eyes of a
dissatisfied mother all the proceedings of the Squire towards her
little boy. They were not of the wisest kind, it must be owned; the
child sipped the strong ale with evident relish and clamoured for
everything which he saw the others enjoying. AimÄe could hardly
attend to Molly for her anxiety as to what her boy was doing and
eating; yet she said nothing. Roger took the end of the table
opposite to that at which sat grandfather and grandchild. After the
boy's first wants were gratified the Squire addressed himself to
Molly.

"Well! and so you can come here a-visiting though you have been among
the grand folks. I thought you were going to cut us, Miss Molly, when
I heard you was gone to the Towers. Couldn't find any other place to
stay at while father and mother were away, but an earl's, eh?"

"They asked me, and I went," said Molly; "now you've asked me, and
I've come here."

"I think you might ha' known you'd be always welcome here, without
waiting for asking. Why, Molly! I look upon you as a kind of a
daughter more than Madam there!" dropping his voice a little,
and perhaps supposing that the child's babble would drown the
signification of his words.--"Nay, you needn't look at me so
pitifully, she doesn't follow English readily."

"I think she does!" said Molly, in a low voice,--not looking up,
however, for fear of catching another glimpse at AimÄe's sudden
forlornness of expression and deepened colour. She felt grateful,
as if for a personal favour, when she heard Roger speaking to AimÄe
the moment afterwards in the tender tones of brotherly friendliness;
and presently these two were sufficiently engaged in a separate
conversation to allow Molly and the Squire to go on talking.

"He's a sturdy chap, isn't he?" said the Squire, stroking the little
Roger's curly head. "And he can puff four puffs at grandpapa's pipe
without being sick, can't he?"

"I s'ant puff any more puffs," said the boy, resolutely. "Mamma says
'No.' I s'ant."

"That's just like her!" said the Squire, dropping his voice this time
however. "As if it could do the child any harm!"

Molly made a point of turning the conversation from all personal
subjects after this, and kept the Squire talking about the progress
of his drainage during the rest of lunch. He offered to take her to
see it; and she acceded to the proposal, thinking, meantime, how
little she need have anticipated the being thrown too intimately with
Roger, who seemed to devote himself to his sister-in-law. But, in
the evening, when AimÄe had gone upstairs to put her boy to bed, and
the Squire was asleep in his easy-chair, a sudden flush of memory
brought Mrs. Goodenough's words again to her mind. She was virtually
tÉte-ł-tÉte with Roger, as she had been dozens of times before, but
now she could not help assuming an air of constraint; her eyes did
not meet his in the old frank way; she took up a book at a pause in
the conversation, and left him puzzled and annoyed at the change
in her manner. And so it went on during all the time of her visit.
If sometimes she forgot, and let herself go into all her old
naturalness, by-and-by she checked herself, and became comparatively
cold and reserved. Roger was pained at all this--more pained day
after day; more anxious to discover the cause. AimÄe, too, silently
noticed how different Molly became in Roger's presence. One day she
could not help saying to Molly,--

"Don't you like Roger? You would, if you only knew how good he is! He
is learned, but that is nothing: it is his goodness that one admires
and loves."

"He is very good," said Molly. "I have known him long enough to know
that."

"But you don't think him agreeable? He is not like my poor husband,
to be sure; and you knew him well, too. Ah! tell me about him once
again. When you first knew him? When his mother was alive?"

Molly had grown very fond of AimÄe; when the latter was at her ease
she had very charming and attaching ways; but feeling uneasy in her
position in the Squire's house, she was almost repellent to him; and
he, too, put on his worst side to her. Roger was most anxious to
bring them together, and had several consultations with Molly as to
the best means of accomplishing this end. As long as they talked upon
this subject, she spoke to him in the quiet sensible manner which she
inherited from her father; but when their discussions on this point
were ended, she fell back into her piquant assumption of dignified
reserve. It was very difficult for her to maintain this strange
manner, especially when once or twice she fancied that it gave him
pain; and she would go into her own room and suddenly burst into
tears on these occasions, and wish that her visit was ended, and
that she was once again in the eventless tranquillity of her own
home. Yet presently her fancy changed, and she clung to the swiftly
passing hours, as if she would still retain the happiness of each.
For, unknown to her, Roger was exerting himself to make her visit
pleasant. He was not willing to appear as the instigator of all the
little plans for each day, for he felt as if, somehow, he did not
hold the same place in her regard as formerly. Still, one day AimÄe
suggested a nutting expedition--another day they gave little Roger
the unheard-of pleasure of tea out-of-doors--there was something else
agreeable for a third; and it was Roger who arranged all these simple
pleasures--such as he knew Molly would enjoy. But to her he only
appeared as the ready forwarder of AimÄe's devices. The week was
nearly gone, when one morning the Squire found Roger sitting in the
old library--with a book before him, it is true, but so deep in
thought that he was evidently startled by his father's unexpected
entrance.

"I thought I should find thee here, my lad! We'll have the old room
done up again before winter; it smells musty enough, and yet I
see it's the place for thee! I want thee to go with me round the
five-acre. I'm thinking of laying it down in grass. It's time for you
to be getting into the fresh air, you look quite wobegone over books,
books, books; there never was a thing like 'em for stealing a man's
health out of him!"

So Roger went out with his father, without saying many words till
they were at some distance from the house. Then he brought out a
sentence with such abruptness that he repaid his father for the start
the latter had given him a quarter of an hour before.

"Father, you remember I'm going out again to the Cape next month! You
spoke of doing up the library. If it is for me, I shall be away all
the winter."

"Can't you get off it?" pleaded his father. "I thought maybe you'd
forgotten all about it."

"Not likely!" said Roger, half smiling.

"Well, but they might have found another man to finish up your work."

"No one can finish it but myself. Besides, an engagement is an
engagement. When I wrote to Lord Hollingford to tell him I must come
home, I promised to go out again for another six months."

"Ay. I know. And perhaps it will put it out of thy mind. It will
always be hard on me to part from thee. But I daresay it's best for
you."

Roger's colour deepened. "You are alluding to--to Miss
Kirkpatrick--Mrs. Henderson, I mean. Father, let me tell you once
for all, I think that was rather a hasty affair. I'm pretty sure now
that we were not suited to each other. I was wretched when I got her
letter--at the Cape I mean--but I believe it was for the best."

"That's right. That's my own boy," said the Squire turning round and
shaking hands with his son with vehemence. "And now I'll tell you
what I heard the other day, when I was at the magistrates' meeting.
They were all saying she had jilted Preston."

"I don't want to hear anything against her; she may have her faults,
but I can never forget how I once loved her."

"Well, well! Perhaps it's right. I was not so bad about it, was I,
Roger? Poor Osborne need not ha' been so secret with me. I asked your
Miss Cynthia out here--and her mother and all--my bark is worse than
my bite. For, if I had a wish on earth, it was to see Osborne married
as befitted one of an old stock, and he went and chose out this
French girl, of no family at all, only a--"

"Never mind what she was; look at what she is! I wonder you are not
more taken with her humility and sweetness, father!"

"I don't even call her pretty," said the Squire uneasily, for he
dreaded a repetition of the arguments which Roger had often used to
make him give AimÄe her proper due of affection and position. "Now
your Miss Cynthia was pretty, I will say that for her, the baggage!
And to think that when you two lads flew right in your father's face,
and picked out girls below you in rank and family, you should neither
of you have set your fancies on my little Molly there. I daresay I
should ha' been angry enough at the time, but the lassie would ha'
found her way to my heart, as never this French lady, nor t' other
one, could ha' done."

Roger did not answer.

"I don't see why you mightn't put up for her still. I'm humble enough
now, and you're not heir as Osborne was who married a servant-maid.
Don't you think you could turn your thoughts upon Molly Gibson,
Roger?"

"No!" said Roger, shortly. "It's too late--too late. Don't let us
talk any more of my marrying. Isn't this the five-acre field?" And
soon he was discussing the relative values of meadow, arable and
pasture land with his father, as heartily as if he had never known
Molly, or loved Cynthia. But the squire was not in such good spirits,
and went but heavily into the discussion. At the end of it he said
łpropos de bottes,--

"But don't you think you could like her if you tried, Roger?"

Roger knew perfectly well to what his father was alluding, but for
an instant he was on the point of pretending to misunderstand. At
length, however, he said, in a low voice,--

"I shall never try, father. Don't let us talk any more about it. As
I said before, it's too late."

The Squire was like a child to whom some toy has been refused;
from time to time the thought of his disappointment in this matter
recurred to his mind; and then he took to blaming Cynthia as the
primary cause of Roger's present indifference to womankind.

It so happened that on Molly's last morning at the Hall, she received
her first letter from Cynthia--Mrs. Henderson. It was just before
breakfast-time; Roger was out of doors, AimÄe had not as yet come
down; Molly was alone in the dining-room, where the table was already
laid. She had just finished reading her letter when the Squire came
in, and she immediately and joyfully told him what the morning had
brought to her. But when she saw the Squire's face, she could have
bitten her tongue out for having named Cynthia's name to him. He
looked vexed and depressed.

"I wish I might never hear of her again--I do. She's been the bane
of my Roger, that's what she has. I haven't slept half the night,
and it's all her fault. Why, there's my boy saying now that he has
no heart for ever marrying, poor lad! I wish it had been you, Molly,
my lads had taken a fancy for. I told Roger so t'other day, and
I said that for all you were beneath what I ever thought to see
them marry,--well--it's of no use--it's too late, now, as he said.
Only never let me hear that baggage's name again, that's all, and
no offence to you either, lassie. I know you love the wench; but
if you'll take an old man's word, you're worth a score of her. I
wish young men would think so too," he muttered as he went to the
side-table to carve the ham, while Molly poured out the tea--her
heart very hot all the time, and effectually silenced for a space.
It was with the greatest difficulty that she could keep tears of
mortification from falling. She felt altogether in a wrong position
in that house, which had been like a home to her until this last
visit. What with Mrs. Goodenough's remarks, and now this speech of
the Squire's, implying--at least to her susceptible imagination--that
his father had proposed her as a wife to Roger, and that she had been
rejected--she was more glad than she could express, or even think,
that she was going home this very morning. Roger came in from his
walk while she was in this state of feeling. He saw in an instant
that something had distressed Molly; and he longed to have the old
friendly right of asking her what it was. But she had effectually
kept him at too great a distance during the last few days for him to
feel at liberty to speak to her in the old straightforward brotherly
way; especially now, when he perceived her efforts to conceal her
feelings, and the way in which she drank her tea in feverish haste,
and accepted bread only to crumble it about her plate, untouched. It
was all that he could do to make talk under these circumstances; but
he backed up her efforts as well as he could until AimÄe came down,
grave and anxious: her boy had not had a good night, and did not seem
well; he had fallen into a feverish sleep now, or she could not have
left him. Immediately the whole table was in a ferment. The Squire
pushed away his plate, and could eat no more; Roger was trying
to extract a detail or a fact out of AimÄe, who began to give
way to tears. Molly quickly proposed that the carriage, which
had been ordered to take her home at eleven, should come round
immediately--she had everything ready packed up, she said,--and
bring back her father at once. By leaving directly, she said, it was
probable they might catch him after he had returned from his morning
visits in the town, and before he had set off on his more distant
round. Her proposal was agreed to, and she went upstairs to put on
her things. She came down all ready into the drawing-room, expecting
to find AimÄe and the Squire there; but during her absence word had
been brought to the anxious mother and grandfather that the child had
wakened up in a panic, and both had rushed up to their darling. But
Roger was in the drawing-room awaiting Molly, with a large bunch of
the choicest flowers.

"Look, Molly!" said he, as she was on the point of leaving the room
again, on finding him there alone. "I gathered these flowers for you
before breakfast." He came to meet her reluctant advance.

"Thank you!" said she. "You are very kind. I am very much obliged to
you."

"Then you must do something for me," said he, determined not to
notice the restraint of her manner, and making the re-arrangement of
the flowers which she held a sort of link between them, so that she
could not follow her impulse, and leave the room.

"Tell me,--honestly as I know you will if you speak at all,--haven't
I done something to vex you since we were so happy at the Towers
together?"

His voice was so kind and true,--his manner so winning yet wistful,
that Molly would have been thankful to tell him all. She believed
that he could have helped her more than any one to understand how she
ought to behave rightly; he would have disentangled her fancies,--if
only he himself had not lain at the very core and centre of all her
perplexity and dismay. How could she tell him of Mrs. Goodenough's
words troubling her maiden modesty? How could she ever repeat what
his father had said that morning, and assure him that she, no more
than he, wished that their old friendliness should be troubled by the
thought of a nearer relationship?

"No, you never vexed me in my whole life, Roger," said she, looking
straight at him for the first time for many days.

"I believe you, because you say so. I have no right to ask further.
Molly, will you give me back one of those flowers, as a pledge of
what you have said?"

"Take whichever you like," said she, eagerly offering him the whole
nosegay to choose from.

"No; you must choose, and you must give it me."

Just then the Squire came in. Roger would have been glad if Molly had
not gone on so eagerly to ransack the bunch for the choicest flower
in his father's presence; but she exclaimed:

"Oh, please, Mr. Hamley, do you know which is Roger's favourite
flower?"

"No. A rose, I daresay. The carriage is at the door, and, Molly my
dear, I don't want to hurry you, but--"

"I know. Here, Roger,--here is a rose!

   ("And red as a rose was she.")

I will find papa as soon as ever I get home. How is the little boy?"

"I'm afraid he's beginning of some kind of a fever."

And the Squire took her to the carriage, talking all the way of the
little boy; Roger following, and hardly heeding what he was doing in
the answer to the question he kept asking himself: "Too late--or not?
Can she ever forget that my first foolish love was given to one so
different?"

While she, as the carriage rolled away, kept saying to herself,--"We
are friends again. I don't believe he will remember what the dear
Squire took it into his head to suggest for many days. It is so
pleasant to be on the old terms again! and what lovely flowers!"




CHAPTER LX.

ROGER HAMLEY'S CONFESSION.


Roger had a great deal to think of as he turned away from looking
after the carriage as long as it could be seen. The day before,
he had believed that Molly had come to view all the symptoms of
his growing love for her,--symptoms which he thought had been so
patent,--as disgusting inconstancy to the inconstant Cynthia; that
she had felt that an attachment which could be so soon transferred to
another was not worth having; and that she had desired to mark all
this by her changed treatment of him, and so to nip it in the bud.
But this morning her old sweet, frank manner had returned--in their
last interview, at any rate. He puzzled himself hard to find out what
could have distressed her at breakfast-time. He even went so far as
to ask Robinson whether Miss Gibson had received any letters that
morning; and when he heard that she had had one, he tried to believe
that the letter was in some way the cause of her sorrow. So far
so good. They were friends again after their unspoken difference;
but that was not enough for Roger. He felt every day more and more
certain that she, and she alone, could make him happy. He had felt
this, and had partly given up all hope, while his father had been
urging upon him the very course he most desired to take. No need for
"trying" to love her, he said to himself,--that was already done. And
yet he was very jealous on her behalf. Was that love worthy of her
which had once been given to Cynthia? Was not this affair too much
a mocking mimicry of the last--again just on the point of leaving
England for a considerable time--if he followed her now to her own
home,--in the very drawing-room where he had once offered to Cynthia?
And then by a strong resolve he determined on this course. They
were friends now, and he kissed the rose that was her pledge of
friendship. If he went to Africa, he ran some deadly chances; he knew
better what they were now than he had done when he went before. Until
his return he would not even attempt to win more of her love than
he already had. But once safe home again, no weak fancies as to
what might or might not be her answer should prevent his running
all chances to gain the woman who was to him the one who excelled
all. His was not the poor vanity that thinks more of the possible
mortification of a refusal than of the precious jewel of a bride that
may be won. Somehow or another, please God to send him back safe, he
would put his fate to the touch. And till then he would be patient.
He was no longer a boy to rush at the coveted object; he was a man
capable of judging and abiding.

Molly sent her father, as soon as she could find him, to the Hall;
and then sate down to the old life in the home drawing-room, where
she missed Cynthia's bright presence at every turn. Mrs. Gibson was
in rather a querulous mood, which fastened itself upon the injury of
Cynthia's letter being addressed to Molly, and not to herself.

"Considering all the trouble I had with her trousseau, I think she
might have written to me."

"But she did--her first letter was to you, mamma," said Molly, her
real thoughts still intent upon the Hall--upon the sick child--upon
Roger, and his begging for the flower.

"Yes, just a first letter, three pages long, with an account of her
crossing; while to you she can write about fashions, and how the
bonnets are worn in Paris, and all sorts of interesting things. But
poor mothers must never expect confidential letters, I have found
that out."

"You may see my letter, mamma," said Molly, "there is really nothing
in it."

"And to think of her writing, and crossing to you who don't value it,
while my poor heart is yearning after my lost child! Really, life is
somewhat hard to bear at times."

Then there was silence--for a while.

"Do tell me something about your visit, Molly. Is Roger very
heart-broken? Does he talk much about Cynthia?"

"No. He does not mention her often; hardly ever, I think."

"I never thought he had much feeling. If he had had, he would not
have let her go so easily."

"I don't see how he could help it. When he came to see her after his
return, she was already engaged to Mr. Henderson--he had come down
that very day," said Molly, with perhaps more heat than the occasion
required.

"My poor head!" said Mrs. Gibson, putting her hands up to her head.
"One may see you've been stopping with people of robust health,
and--excuse my saying it, Molly, of your friends--of unrefined
habits, you've got to talk in so loud a voice. But do remember my
head, Molly. So Roger has quite forgotten Cynthia, has he? Oh! what
inconstant creatures men are! He will be falling in love with some
grandee next, mark my words! They are making a pet and a lion of him,
and he's just the kind of weak young man to have his head turned by
it all; and to propose to some fine lady of rank, who would no more
think of marrying him than of marrying her footman."

"I don't think it is likely," said Molly, stoutly. "Roger is too
sensible for anything of the kind."

"That's just the fault I always found with him; sensible and
cold-hearted! Now, that's a kind of character which may be very
valuable, but which revolts me. Give me warmth of heart, even with a
little of that extravagance of feeling which misleads the judgment,
and conducts into romance. Poor Mr. Kirkpatrick! That was just
his character. I used to tell him that his love for me was quite
romantic. I think I have told you about his walking five miles in the
rain to get me a muffin once when I was ill?"

"Yes!" said Molly. "It was very kind of him."

"So imprudent, too! Just what one of your sensible, cold-hearted,
commonplace people would never have thought of doing. With his cough
and all."

"I hope he didn't suffer for it?" replied Molly, anxious at any
cost to keep off the subject of the Hamleys, upon which she and her
stepmother always disagreed, and on which she found it difficult to
keep her temper.

"Yes, indeed, he did! I don't think he ever got over the cold he
caught that day. I wish you had known him, Molly. I sometimes wonder
what would have happened if you had been my real daughter, and
Cynthia dear papa's, and Mr. Kirkpatrick and your own dear mother had
all lived. People talk a good deal about natural affinities. It would
have been a question for a philosopher." She began to think on the
impossibilities she had suggested.

"I wonder how the poor little boy is?" said Molly, after a pause,
speaking out her thought.

"Poor little child! When one thinks how little his prolonged
existence is to be desired, one feels that his death would be a
boon."

"Mamma! what do you mean?" asked Molly, much shocked. "Why, every one
cares for his life as the most precious thing! You have never seen
him! He is the bonniest, sweetest little fellow that can be! What do
you mean?"

"I should have thought that the Squire would have desired a
better-born heir than the offspring of a servant,--with all his ideas
about descent and blood and family. And I should have thought that it
was a little mortifying to Roger--who must naturally have looked upon
himself as his brother's heir--to find a little interloping child,
half French, half English, stepping into his shoes!"

"You don't know how fond they are of him,--the Squire looks upon him
as the apple of his eye."

"Molly! Molly! pray don't let me hear you using such vulgar
expressions. When shall I teach you true refinement--that refinement
which consists in never even thinking a vulgar, commonplace thing!
Proverbs and idioms are never used by people of education. 'Apple of
his eye!' I am really shocked."

"Well, mamma, I'm very sorry; but after all, what I wanted to say
as strongly as I could was, that the Squire loves the little boy as
much as his own child; and that Roger--oh! what a shame to think that
Roger--" And she stopped suddenly short, as if she were choked.

"I don't wonder at your indignation, my dear!" said Mrs. Gibson.
"It is just what I should have felt at your age. But one learns the
baseness of human nature with advancing years. I was wrong, though,
to undeceive you so early--but depend upon it, the thought I alluded
to has crossed Roger Hamley's mind!"

"All sorts of thoughts cross one's mind--it depends upon whether one
gives them harbour and encouragement," said Molly.

"My dear, if you must have the last word, don't let it be a truism.
But let us talk on some more interesting subject. I asked Cynthia to
buy me a silk gown in Paris, and I said I would send her word what
colour I fixed upon--I think dark blue is the most becoming to my
complexion; what do you say?"

Molly agreed, sooner than take the trouble of thinking about the
thing at all; she was far too full of her silent review of all the
traits in Roger's character which had lately come under her notice,
and that gave the lie direct to her stepmother's supposition. Just
then they heard Mr. Gibson's step downstairs. But it was some time
before he made his entrance into the room where they were sitting.

"How is little Roger?" said Molly, eagerly.

"Beginning with scarlet fever, I'm afraid. It's well you left when
you did, Molly. You've never had it. We must stop up all intercourse
with the Hall for a time. If there's one illness I dread, it is
this."

"But you go and come back to us, papa."

"Yes. But I always take plenty of precautions. However, no need to
talk about risks that lie in the way of one's duty. It is unnecessary
risks that we must avoid."

"Will he have it badly?" asked Molly.

"I can't tell. I shall do my best for the wee laddie."

Whenever Mr. Gibson's feelings were touched, he was apt to recur to
the language of his youth. Molly knew now that he was much interested
in the case.

For some days there was imminent danger to the little boy; for some
weeks there was a more chronic form of illness to contend with; but
when the immediate danger was over and the warm daily interest was
past, Molly began to realize that, from the strict quarantine her
father evidently thought it necessary to establish between the two
houses, she was not likely to see Roger again before his departure
for Africa. Oh! if she had but made more of the uncared-for days that
she had passed with him at the Hall! Worse than uncared for; days on
which she had avoided him; refused to converse freely with him; given
him pain by her change of manner; for she had read in his eyes, heard
in his voice, that he had been perplexed and pained, and now her
imagination dwelt on and exaggerated the expression of his tones and
looks.

One evening after dinner, her father said,--

"As the country-people say, I've done a stroke of work to-day. Roger
Hamley and I have laid our heads together, and we've made a plan by
which Mrs. Osborne and her boy will leave the Hall."

"What did I say the other day, Molly?" said Mrs. Gibson,
interrupting, and giving Molly a look of extreme intelligence.

"And go into lodgings at Jennings' farm; not four hundred yards from
the Park-field gate," continued Mr. Gibson. "The Squire and his
daughter-in-law have got to be much better friends over the little
fellow's sick-bed; and I think he sees now how impossible it would
be for the mother to leave her child, and go and be happy in France,
which has been the notion running in his head all this time. To buy
her off, in fact. But that one night, when I was very uncertain
whether I could bring him through, they took to crying together,
and condoling with each other; and it was just like tearing down a
curtain that had been between them; they have been rather friends
than otherwise ever since. Still Roger"--(Molly's cheeks grew warm
and her eyes soft and bright; it was such a pleasure to hear his
name)--"and I both agree that his mother knows much better how to
manage the boy than his grandfather does. I suppose that was the
one good thing she got from that hard-hearted mistress of hers. She
certainly has been well trained in the management of children. And
it makes her impatient, and annoyed, and unhappy, when she sees
the Squire giving the child nuts and ale, and all sorts of silly
indulgences, and spoiling him in every possible way. Yet she's a
coward, and doesn't speak out her mind. Now by being in lodgings, and
having her own servants--nice pretty rooms they are, too; we went to
see them, and Mrs. Jennings promises to attend well to Mrs. Osborne
Hamley, and is very much honoured, and all that sort of thing--not
ten minutes' walk from the Hall, too, so that she and the little chap
may easily go backwards and forwards as often as they like, and yet
she may keep the control over the child's discipline and diet. In
short, I think I've done a good day's work," he continued, stretching
himself a little; and then with a shake rousing himself, and making
ready to go out again, to see a patient who had sent for him in his
absence.

"A good day's work!" he repeated to himself as he ran downstairs.
"I don't know when I have been so happy!" For he had not told Molly
all that had passed between him and Roger. Roger had begun a fresh
subject of conversation just as Mr. Gibson was hastening away from
the Hall, after completing the new arrangement for AimÄe and her
child.

"You know that I set off next Tuesday, Mr. Gibson, don't you?" said
Roger, a little abruptly.

"To be sure. I hope you'll be as successful in all your scientific
objects as you were the last time, and have no sorrows awaiting you
when you come back."

"Thank you. Yes. I hope so. You don't think there's any danger of
infection now, do you?"

"No! If the disease were to spread through the household, I think
we should have had some signs of it before now. One is never sure,
remember, with scarlet fever."

Roger was silent for a minute or two. "Should you be afraid," he said
at length, "of seeing me at your house?"

"Thank you; but I think I would rather decline the pleasure of your
society there at present. It's only three weeks or a month since
the child began. Besides, I shall be over here again before you go.
I'm always on my guard against symptoms of dropsy. I have known it
supervene."

"Then I shall not see Molly again!" said Roger, in a tone and with a
look of great disappointment.

Mr. Gibson turned his keen, observant eyes upon the young man, and
looked at him in as penetrating a manner as if he had been beginning
with an unknown illness. Then the doctor and the father compressed
his lips and gave vent to a long intelligent whistle. "Whew!" said
he.

Roger's bronzed cheeks took a deeper shade.

"You will take a message to her from me, won't you? A message of
farewell?" he pleaded.

"Not I. I'm not going to be a message-carrier between any young man
and young woman. I'll tell my womenkind I forbade you to come near
the house, and that you're sorry to go away without bidding good-by.
That's all I shall say."

"But you do not disapprove?--I see you guess why. Oh! Mr. Gibson,
just speak to me one word of what must be in your heart, though you
are pretending not to understand why I would give worlds to see Molly
again before I go."

"My dear boy!" said Mr. Gibson, more affected than he liked to show,
and laying his hand on Roger's shoulder. Then he pulled himself up,
and said gravely enough,--

"Mind, Molly is not Cynthia. If she were to care for you, she is not
one who could transfer her love to the next comer."

"You mean not as readily as I have done," replied Roger. "I only wish
you could know what a different feeling this is to my boyish love for
Cynthia."

"I wasn't thinking of you when I spoke; but, however, as I might have
remembered afterwards that you were not a model of constancy, let us
hear what you have to say for yourself."

"Not much. I did love Cynthia very much. Her manners and her beauty
bewitched me; but her letters,--short, hurried letters,--sometimes
showing that she really hadn't taken the trouble to read mine
through,--I cannot tell you the pain they gave me! Twelve months'
solitude, in frequent danger of one's life--face to face with
death--sometimes ages a man like many years' experience. Still I
longed for the time when I should see her sweet face again, and hear
her speak. Then the letter at the Cape!--and still I hoped. But you
know how I found her, when I went to have the interview which I
trusted might end in the renewal of our relations,--engaged to Mr.
Henderson. I saw her walking with him in your garden, coquetting with
him about a flower, just as she used to do with me. I can see the
pitying look in Molly's eyes as she watched me; I can see it now. And
I could beat myself for being such a blind fool as to-- What must she
think of me? how she must despise me, choosing the false Duessa."

"Come, come! Cynthia isn't so bad as that. She's a very fascinating,
faulty creature."

"I know! I know! I will never allow any one to say a word against
her. If I called her the false Duessa it was because I wanted to
express my sense of the difference between her and Molly as strongly
as I could. You must allow for a lover's exaggeration. Besides, all I
wanted to say was,--Do you think that Molly, after seeing and knowing
that I had loved a person so inferior to herself, could ever be
brought to listen to me?"

"I don't know. I can't tell. And even if I could, I wouldn't. Only if
it's any comfort to you, I may say what my experience has taught me.
Women are queer, unreasoning creatures, and are just as likely as not
to love a man who has been throwing away his affection."

"Thank you, sir!" said Roger, interrupting him. "I see you mean to
give me encouragement. And I had resolved never to give Molly a hint
of what I felt till I returned,--and then to try and win her by every
means in my power. I determined not to repeat the former scene in the
former place,--in your drawing-room,--however I might be tempted. And
perhaps, after all, she avoided me when she was here last."

"Now, Roger, I've listened to you long enough. If you've nothing
better to do with your time than to talk about my daughter, I have.
When you come back it will be time enough to inquire how far your
father would approve of such an engagement."

"He himself urged it upon me the other day--but then I was in
despair--I thought it was too late."

"And what means you are likely to have of maintaining a wife?--I
always thought that point was passed too lightly over when you formed
your hurried engagement to Cynthia. I'm not mercenary,--Molly has
some money independently of me,--that she by the way knows nothing
of,--not much;--and I can allow her something. But all these things
must be left till your return."

"Then you sanction my attachment?"

"I don't know what you mean by sanctioning it. I can't help it. I
suppose losing one's daughter is a necessary evil. Still"--seeing the
disappointed expression on Roger's face--"it is but fair to you to
say, I'd rather give my child,--my only child, remember!--to you,
than to any man in the world!"

"Thank you!" said Roger, shaking hands with Mr. Gibson, almost
against the will of the latter. "And I may see her, just once, before
I go?"

"Decidedly not. There I come in as doctor as well as father. No!"

"But you will take a message, at any rate?"

"To my wife and to her conjointly. I will not separate them. I will
not in the slightest way be a go-between."

"Very well," said Roger. "Tell them both as strongly as you can how
I regret your prohibition. I see I must submit. But if I don't come
back, I'll haunt you for having been so cruel."

"Come, I like that. Give me a wise man of science in love! No one
beats him in folly. Good-by."

"Good-by. You will see Molly this afternoon!"

"To be sure. And you will see your father. But I don't heave such
portentous sighs at the thought."

Mr. Gibson gave Roger's message to his wife and to Molly that evening
at dinner. It was but what the latter had expected, after all her
father had said of the very great danger of infection; but now that
her expectation came in the shape of a final decision, it took away
her appetite. She submitted in silence; but her observant father
noticed that after this speech of his, she only played with the food
on her plate, and concealed a good deal of it under her knife and
fork.

"Lover _versus_ father!" thought he, half sadly. "Lover wins." And
he, too, became indifferent to all that remained of his dinner. Mrs.
Gibson pattered on; and nobody listened.

The day of Roger's departure came. Molly tried hard to forget it
in working away at a cushion she was preparing as a present to
Cynthia; people did worsted-work in those days. One, two, three. One,
two, three, four, five, six, seven; all wrong: she was thinking of
something else, and had to unpick it. It was a rainy day, too; and
Mrs. Gibson, who had planned to go out and pay some calls, had to
stay indoors. This made her restless and fidgety. She kept going
backwards and forwards to different windows in the drawing-room to
look at the weather, as if she imagined that while it rained at one
window, it might be fine weather at another.

"Molly--come here! who is that man wrapped up in a
cloak,--there,--near the Park wall, under the beech-tree--he has been
there this half-hour and more, never stirring, and looking at this
house all the time! I think it's very suspicious."

Molly looked, and in an instant recognized Roger under all his wraps.
Her first instinct was to draw back. The next to come forwards, and
say--"Why, mamma, it's Roger Hamley! Look now--he's kissing his hand;
he's wishing us good-by in the only way he can!" And she responded
to his sign; but she was not sure if he perceived her modest quiet
movement, for Mrs. Gibson became immediately so demonstrative that
Molly fancied that her eager foolish pantomimic motions must absorb
all his attention.

"I call this so attentive of him," said Mrs. Gibson, in the midst of
a volley of kisses of her hand. "Really, it is quite romantic. It
reminds me of former days--but he will be too late! I must send him
away; it is half-past twelve!" And she took out her watch and held it
up, tapping it with her forefinger, and occupying the very centre of
the window. Molly could only peep here and there, dodging now up, now
down, now on this side, now on that, of the perpetually-moving arms.
She fancied she saw something of a corresponding movement on Roger's
part. At length he went away slowly, slowly, and often looking back,
in spite of the tapped watch. Mrs. Gibson at last retreated, and
Molly quietly moved into her place to see his figure once more before
the turn of the road hid it from her view. He, too, knew where the
last glimpse of Mr. Gibson's house was to be obtained, and once more
he turned, and his white handkerchief floated in the air. Molly waved
hers high up, with eager longing that it should be seen. And then,
he was gone! and Molly returned to her worsted-work, happy, glowing,
sad, content, and thinking to herself how sweet is--friendship!

When she came to a sense of the present, Mrs. Gibson was saying,--

"Upon my word, though Roger Hamley has never been a great favourite
of mine, this little attention of his has reminded me very forcibly
of a very charming young man--a _soupirant_, as the French would call
him--Lieutenant Harper--you must have heard me speak of him, Molly?"

"I think I have!" said Molly, absently.

"Well, you remember how devoted he was to me when I was at Mrs.
Duncombe's, my first situation, and I only seventeen. And when the
recruiting party was ordered to another town, poor Mr. Harper came
and stood opposite the schoolroom window for nearly an hour, and I
know it was his doing that the band played 'The girl I left behind
me,' when they marched out the next day. Poor Mr. Harper! It was
before I knew dear Mr. Kirkpatrick! Dear me. How often my poor heart
has had to bleed in this life of mine! not but what dear papa is a
very worthy man, and makes me very happy. He would spoil me, indeed,
if I would let him. Still he is not as rich as Mr. Henderson."

That last sentence contained the germ of Mrs. Gibson's present
grievance. Having married Cynthia, as her mother put it--taking
credit to herself as if she had had the principal part in the
achievement--she now became a little envious of her daughter's good
fortune in being the wife of a young, handsome, rich, and moderately
fashionable man, who lived in London. She naĽvely expressed her
feelings on this subject to her husband one day when she was really
not feeling quite well, and when consequently her annoyances were
much more present to her mind than her sources of happiness.

"It is such a pity!" said she, "that I was born when I was. I should
so have liked to belong to this generation."

"That's sometimes my own feeling," said he. "So many new views seem
to be opened in science, that I should like, if it were possible, to
live till their reality was ascertained, and one saw what they led
to. But I don't suppose that's your reason, my dear, for wishing to
be twenty or thirty years younger."

"No, indeed. And I did not put it in that hard unpleasant way; I only
said I should like to belong to this generation. To tell the truth,
I was thinking of Cynthia. Without vanity, I believe I was as pretty
as she is--when I was a girl, I mean; I had not her dark eyelashes,
but then my nose was straighter. And now look at the difference! I
have to live in a little country town with three servants, and no
carriage; and she with her inferior good looks will live in Sussex
Place, and keep a man and a brougham, and I don't know what. But the
fact is, in this generation there are so many more rich young men
than there were when I was a girl."

"Oh, ho! so that's your reason, is it, my dear? If you had been young
now you might have married somebody as well off as Walter?"

"Yes!" said she. "I think that was my idea. Of course I should have
liked him to be you. I always think if you had gone to the bar you
might have succeeded better, and lived in London, too. I don't think
Cynthia cares much where she lives, yet you see it has come to her."

"What has--London?"

"Oh, you dear, facetious man. Now that's just the thing to have
captivated a jury. I don't believe Walter will ever be so clever
as you are. Yet he can take Cynthia to Paris, and abroad, and
everywhere. I only hope all this indulgence won't develope the faults
in Cynthia's character. It's a week since we heard from her, and I
did write so particularly to ask her for the autumn fashions before I
bought my new bonnet. But riches are a great snare."

"Be thankful you are spared temptation, my dear."

"No, I'm not. Everybody likes to be tempted. And, after all, it's
very easy to resist temptation, if one wishes."

"I don't find it so easy," said her husband.

"Here's medicine for you, mamma," said Molly, entering with a letter
held up in her hand. "A letter from Cynthia."

"Oh, you dear little messenger of good news! There was one of the
heathen deities in Mangnall's Questions whose office it was to bring
news. The letter is dated from Calais. They're coming home! She's
bought me a shawl and a bonnet! The dear creature! Always thinking
of others before herself: good fortune cannot spoil her. They've a
fortnight left of their holiday! Their house is not quite ready;
they're coming here. Oh, now, Mr. Gibson, we must have the new
dinner-service at Watts's I've set my heart on so long! 'Home'
Cynthia calls this house. I'm sure it has been a home to her, poor
darling! I doubt if there is another man in the world who would have
treated his step-daughter like dear papa! And, Molly, you must have a
new gown."

"Come, come! Remember I belong to the last generation," said Mr.
Gibson.

"And Cynthia will not notice what I wear," said Molly, bright with
pleasure at the thought of seeing her again.

"No! but Walter will. He has such a quick eye for dress, and I think
I rival papa; if he's a good stepfather, I'm a good stepmother, and
I could not bear to see my Molly shabby, and not looking her best.
I must have a new gown too. It won't do to look as if we had nothing
but the dresses which we wore at the wedding!"

But Molly stood out against the new gown for herself, and urged
that if Cynthia and Walter were to come to visit them often, they
had better see them as they really were, in dress, habits, and
appointments. When Mr. Gibson had left the room, Mrs. Gibson softly
reproached Molly for her obstinacy.

"You might have allowed me to beg for a new gown for you, Molly, when
you knew how much I had admired that figured silk at Brown's the
other day. And now, of course, I can't be so selfish as to get it for
myself, and you to have nothing. You should learn to understand the
wishes of other people. Still, on the whole, you are a dear, sweet
girl, and I only wish--well, I know what I wish; only dear papa does
not like it to be talked about. And now cover me up close, and let me
go to sleep, and dream about my dear Cynthia and my new shawl!"








CHAPTER I.
OUR SOCIETY


IN the first place, Cranford is in possession of the Amazons; all the
holders of houses above a certain rent are women.  If a married couple
come to settle in the town, somehow the gentleman disappears; he is
either fairly frightened to death by being the only man in the Cranford
evening parties, or he is accounted for by being with his regiment, his
ship, or closely engaged in business all the week in the great
neighbouring commercial town of Drumble, distant only twenty miles on a
railroad.  In short, whatever does become of the gentlemen, they are
not at Cranford.  What could they do if they were there?  The surgeon
has his round of thirty miles, and sleeps at Cranford; but every man
cannot be a surgeon.  For keeping the trim gardens full of choice
flowers without a weed to speck them; for frightening away little boys
who look wistfully at the said flowers through the railings; for rushing
out at the geese that occasionally venture in to the gardens if the
gates are left open; for deciding all questions of literature and
politics without troubling themselves with unnecessary reasons or
arguments; for obtaining clear and correct knowledge of everybody’s
affairs in the parish; for keeping their neat maid-servants in admirable
order; for kindness (somewhat dictatorial) to the poor, and real tender
good offices to each other whenever they are in distress, the ladies of
Cranford are quite sufficient.  “A man,” as one of them observed to me
once, “is _so_ in the way in the house!”  Although the ladies of
Cranford know all each other’s proceedings, they are exceedingly
indifferent to each other’s opinions. Indeed, as each has her own
individuality, not to say eccentricity, pretty strongly developed,
nothing is so easy as verbal retaliation; but, somehow, good-will
reigns among them to a considerable degree.

The Cranford ladies have only an occasional little quarrel, spirited out
in a few peppery words and angry jerks of the head; just enough to
prevent the even tenor of their lives from becoming too flat.  Their
dress is very independent of fashion; as they observe, “What does it
signify how we dress here at Cranford, where everybody knows us?”  And
if they go from home, their reason is equally cogent, “What does it
signify how we dress here, where nobody knows us?”  The materials of
their clothes are, in general, good and plain, and most of them are
nearly as scrupulous as Miss Tyler, of cleanly memory; but I will
answer for it, the last gigot, the last tight and scanty petticoat in
wear in England, was seen in Cranford—and seen without a smile.

            [Picture: A magnificent family red silk umbrella]

I can testify to a magnificent family red silk umbrella, under which a
gentle little spinster, left alone of many brothers and sisters, used to
patter to church on rainy days.  Have you any red silk umbrellas in
London?  We had a tradition of the first that had ever been seen in
Cranford; and the little boys mobbed it, and called it “a stick in
petticoats.”  It might have been the very red silk one I have described,
held by a strong father over a troop of little ones; the poor little
lady—the survivor of all—could scarcely carry it.

Then there were rules and regulations for visiting and calls; and they
were announced to any young people who might be staying in the town,
with all the solemnity with which the old Manx laws were read once a
year on the Tinwald Mount.

“Our friends have sent to inquire how you are after your journey
to-night, my dear” (fifteen miles in a gentleman’s carriage); “they will
give you some rest to-morrow, but the next day, I have no doubt, they
will call; so be at liberty after twelve—from twelve to three are our
calling hours.”

Then, after they had called—

“It is the third day; I dare say your mamma has told you, my dear, never
to let more than three days elapse between receiving a call and
returning it; and also, that you are never to stay longer than a quarter
of an hour.”

“But am I to look at my watch?  How am I to find out when a quarter of
an hour has passed?”

“You must keep thinking about the time, my dear, and not allow yourself
to forget it in conversation.”

As everybody had this rule in their minds, whether they received or paid
a call, of course no absorbing subject was ever spoken about.  We kept
ourselves to short sentences of small talk, and were punctual to our
time.

I imagine that a few of the gentlefolks of Cranford were poor, and had
some difficulty in making both ends meet; but they were like the
Spartans, and concealed their smart under a smiling face.  We none of us
spoke of money, because that subject savoured of commerce and trade, and
though some might be poor, we were all aristocratic.  The Cranfordians
had that kindly _esprit de corps_ which made them overlook all
deficiencies in success when some among them tried to conceal their
poverty.  When Mrs Forrester, for instance, gave a party in her
baby-house of a dwelling, and the little maiden disturbed the ladies on
the sofa by a request that she might get the tea-tray out from
underneath, everyone took this novel proceeding as the most natural
thing in the world, and talked on about household forms and ceremonies
as if we all believed that our hostess had a regular servants’ hall,
second table, with housekeeper and steward, instead of the one little
charity-school maiden, whose short ruddy arms could never have been
strong enough to carry the tray upstairs, if she had not been assisted
in private by her mistress, who now sat in state, pretending not to know
what cakes were sent up, though she knew, and we knew, and she knew that
we knew, and we knew that she knew that we knew, she had been busy all
the morning making tea-bread and sponge-cakes.

There were one or two consequences arising from this general but
unacknowledged poverty, and this very much acknowledged gentility, which
were not amiss, and which might be introduced into many circles of
society to their great improvement.  For instance, the inhabitants of
Cranford kept early hours, and clattered home in their pattens, under
the guidance of a lantern-bearer, about nine o’clock at night; and the
whole town was abed and asleep by half-past ten.  Moreover, it was
considered “vulgar” (a tremendous word in Cranford) to give anything
expensive, in the way of eatable or drinkable, at the evening
entertainments.  Wafer bread-and-butter and sponge-biscuits were all
that the Honourable Mrs Jamieson gave; and she was sister-in-law to the
late Earl of Glenmire, although she did practise such “elegant economy.”

“Elegant economy!”  How naturally one falls back into the phraseology of
Cranford!  There, economy was always “elegant,” and money-spending
always “vulgar and ostentatious”; a sort of sour-grapeism which made us
very peaceful and satisfied.  I never shall forget the dismay felt when
a certain Captain Brown came to live at Cranford, and openly spoke about
his being poor—not in a whisper to an intimate friend, the doors and
windows being previously closed, but in the public street! in a loud
military voice! alleging his poverty as a reason for not taking a
particular house.  The ladies of Cranford were already rather moaning
over the invasion of their territories by a man and a gentleman.  He was
a half-pay captain, and had obtained some situation on a neighbouring
railroad, which had been vehemently petitioned against by the little
town; and if, in addition to his masculine gender, and his connection
with the obnoxious railroad, he was so brazen as to talk of being
poor—why, then, indeed, he must be sent to Coventry.  Death was as true
and as common as poverty; yet people never spoke about that, loud out in
the streets.  It was a word not to be mentioned to ears polite.  We had
tacitly agreed to ignore that any with whom we associated on terms of
visiting equality could ever be prevented by poverty from doing anything
that they wished.  If we walked to or from a party, it was because the
night was _so_ fine, or the air _so_ refreshing, not because
sedan-chairs were expensive.  If we wore prints, instead of summer
silks, it was because we preferred a washing material; and so on, till
we blinded ourselves to the vulgar fact that we were, all of us, people
of very moderate means.  Of course, then, we did not know what to make
of a man who could speak of poverty as if it was not a disgrace.  Yet,
somehow, Captain Brown made himself respected in Cranford, and was
called upon, in spite of all resolutions to the contrary.  I was
surprised to hear his opinions quoted as authority at a visit which I
paid to Cranford about a year after he had settled in the town.  My own
friends had been among the bitterest opponents of any proposal to visit
the Captain and his daughters, only twelve months before; and now he was
even admitted in the tabooed hours before twelve.  True, it was to
discover the cause of a smoking chimney, before the fire was lighted;
but still Captain Brown walked upstairs, nothing daunted, spoke in a
voice too large for the room, and joked quite in the way of a tame man
about the house.  He had been blind to all the small slights, and
omissions of trivial ceremonies, with which he had been received.  He
had been friendly, though the Cranford ladies had been cool; he had
answered small sarcastic compliments in good faith; and with his manly
frankness had overpowered all the shrinking which met him as a man who
was not ashamed to be poor. And, at last, his excellent masculine common
sense, and his facility in devising expedients to overcome domestic
dilemmas, had gained him an extraordinary place as authority among the
Cranford ladies.  He himself went on in his course, as unaware of his
popularity as he had been of the reverse; and I am sure he was startled
one day when he found his advice so highly esteemed as to make some
counsel which he had given in jest to be taken in sober, serious
earnest.

It was on this subject: An old lady had an Alderney cow, which she
looked upon as a daughter.  You could not pay the short quarter of an
hour call without being told of the wonderful milk or wonderful
intelligence of this animal.  The whole town knew and kindly regarded
Miss Betsy Barker’s Alderney; therefore great was the sympathy and
regret when, in an unguarded moment, the poor cow tumbled into a
lime-pit.  She moaned so loudly that she was soon heard and rescued; but
meanwhile the poor beast had lost most of her hair, and came out looking
naked, cold, and miserable, in a bare skin.  Everybody pitied the
animal, though a few could not restrain their smiles at her droll
appearance.  Miss Betsy Barker absolutely cried with sorrow and dismay;
and it was said she thought of trying a bath of oil.  This remedy,
perhaps, was recommended by some one of the number whose advice she
asked; but the proposal, if ever it was made, was knocked on the head by
Captain Brown’s decided “Get her a flannel waistcoat and flannel
drawers, ma’am, if you wish to keep her alive.  But my advice is, kill
the poor creature at once.”

Miss Betsy Barker dried her eyes, and thanked the Captain heartily; she
set to work, and by-and-by all the town turned out to see the Alderney
meekly going to her pasture, clad in dark grey flannel.  I have watched
her myself many a time.  Do you ever see cows dressed in grey flannel in
London?

                  [Picture: Meekly going to her pasture]

Captain Brown had taken a small house on the outskirts of the town,
where he lived with his two daughters.  He must have been upwards of
sixty at the time of the first visit I paid to Cranford after I had left
it as a residence.  But he had a wiry, well-trained, elastic figure, a
stiff military throw-back of his head, and a springing step, which made
him appear much younger than he was.  His eldest daughter looked almost
as old as himself, and betrayed the fact that his real was more than his
apparent age.  Miss Brown must have been forty; she had a sickly,
pained, careworn expression on her face, and looked as if the gaiety of
youth had long faded out of sight.  Even when young she must have been
plain and hard-featured.  Miss Jessie Brown was ten years younger than
her sister, and twenty shades prettier.  Her face was round and dimpled.
 Miss Jenkyns once said, in a passion against Captain Brown (the cause
of which I will tell you presently), “that she thought it was time for
Miss Jessie to leave off her dimples, and not always to be trying to
look like a child.”  It was true there was something childlike in her
face; and there will be, I think, till she dies, though she should live
to a hundred. Her eyes were large blue wondering eyes, looking straight
at you; her nose was unformed and snub, and her lips were red and dewy;
she wore her hair, too, in little rows of curls, which heightened this
appearance.  I do not know whether she was pretty or not; but I liked
her face, and so did everybody, and I do not think she could help her
dimples.  She had something of her father’s jauntiness of gait and
manner; and any female observer might detect a slight difference in the
attire of the two sisters—that of Miss Jessie being about two pounds per
annum more expensive than Miss Brown’s.  Two pounds was a large sum in
Captain Brown’s annual disbursements.

Such was the impression made upon me by the Brown family when I first
saw them all together in Cranford Church.  The Captain I had met
before—on the occasion of the smoky chimney, which he had cured by some
simple alteration in the flue.  In church, he held his double eye-glass
to his eyes during the Morning Hymn, and then lifted up his head erect
and sang out loud and joyfully.  He made the responses louder than the
clerk—an old man with a piping feeble voice, who, I think, felt
aggrieved at the Captain’s sonorous bass, and quivered higher and higher
in consequence.

On coming out of church, the brisk Captain paid the most gallant
attention to his two daughters.  He nodded and smiled to his
acquaintances; but he shook hands with none until he had helped Miss
Brown to unfurl her umbrella, had relieved her of her prayer-book, and
had waited patiently till she, with trembling nervous hands, had taken
up her gown to walk through the wet roads.

I wonder what the Cranford ladies did with Captain Brown at their
parties.  We had often rejoiced, in former days, that there was no
gentleman to be attended to, and to find conversation for, at the
card-parties.  We had congratulated ourselves upon the snugness of the
evenings; and, in our love for gentility, and distaste of mankind, we
had almost persuaded ourselves that to be a man was to be “vulgar”; so
that when I found my friend and hostess, Miss Jenkyns, was going to have
a party in my honour, and that Captain and the Miss Browns were invited,
I wondered much what would be the course of the evening.  Card-tables,
with green baize tops, were set out by daylight, just as usual; it was
the third week in November, so the evenings closed in about four.
Candles, and clean packs of cards, were arranged on each table.  The
fire was made up; the neat maid-servant had received her last
directions; and there we stood, dressed in our best, each with a
candle-lighter in our hands, ready to dart at the candles as soon as the
first knock came.  Parties in Cranford were solemn festivities, making
the ladies feel gravely elated as they sat together in their best
dresses.  As soon as three had arrived, we sat down to “Preference,” I
being the unlucky fourth.  The next four comers were put down
immediately to another table; and presently the tea-trays, which I had
seen set out in the store-room as I passed in the morning, were placed
each on the middle of a card-table. The china was delicate egg-shell;
the old-fashioned silver glittered with polishing; but the eatables were
of the slightest description.  While the trays were yet on the tables,
Captain and the Miss Browns came in; and I could see that, somehow or
other, the Captain was a favourite with all the ladies present.  Ruffled
brows were smoothed, sharp voices lowered at his approach.  Miss Brown
looked ill, and depressed almost to gloom. Miss Jessie smiled as usual,
and seemed nearly as popular as her father. He immediately and quietly
assumed the man’s place in the room; attended to every one’s wants,
lessened the pretty maid-servant’s labour by waiting on empty cups and
bread-and-butterless ladies; and yet did it all in so easy and dignified
a manner, and so much as if it were a matter of course for the strong to
attend to the weak, that he was a true man throughout.  He played for
threepenny points with as grave an interest as if they had been pounds;
and yet, in all his attention to strangers, he had an eye on his
suffering daughter—for suffering I was sure she was, though to many eyes
she might only appear to be irritable.  Miss Jessie could not play
cards: but she talked to the sitters-out, who, before her coming, had
been rather inclined to be cross.  She sang, too, to an old cracked
piano, which I think had been a spinet in its youth.  Miss Jessie sang,
“Jock of Hazeldean” a little out of tune; but we were none of us
musical, though Miss Jenkyns beat time, out of time, by way of appearing
to be so.

It was very good of Miss Jenkyns to do this; for I had seen that, a
little before, she had been a good deal annoyed by Miss Jessie Brown’s
unguarded admission (_à propos_ of Shetland wool) that she had an uncle,
her mother’s brother, who was a shopkeeper in Edinburgh.  Miss Jenkyns
tried to drown this confession by a terrible cough—for the Honourable
Mrs Jamieson was sitting at a card-table nearest Miss Jessie, and what
would she say or think if she found out she was in the same room with a
shop-keeper’s niece!  But Miss Jessie Brown (who had no tact, as we all
agreed the next morning) _would_ repeat the information, and assure Miss
Pole she could easily get her the identical Shetland wool required,
“through my uncle, who has the best assortment of Shetland goods of any
one in Edinbro’.”  It was to take the taste of this out of our mouths,
and the sound of this out of our ears, that Miss Jenkyns proposed music;
so I say again, it was very good of her to beat time to the song.

When the trays re-appeared with biscuits and wine, punctually at a
quarter to nine, there was conversation, comparing of cards, and talking
over tricks; but by-and-by Captain Brown sported a bit of literature.

“Have you seen any numbers of ‘The Pickwick Papers’?” said he.  (They
were then publishing in parts.)  “Capital thing!”

Now Miss Jenkyns was daughter of a deceased rector of Cranford; and, on
the strength of a number of manuscript sermons, and a pretty good
library of divinity, considered herself literary, and looked upon any
conversation about books as a challenge to her.  So she answered and
said, “Yes, she had seen them; indeed, she might say she had read them.”

“And what do you think of them?” exclaimed Captain Brown.  “Aren’t they
famously good?”

So urged Miss Jenkyns could not but speak.

“I must say, I don’t think they are by any means equal to Dr Johnson.
Still, perhaps, the author is young.  Let him persevere, and who knows
what he may become if he will take the great Doctor for his model?”
This was evidently too much for Captain Brown to take placidly; and I
saw the words on the tip of his tongue before Miss Jenkyns had finished
her sentence.

“It is quite a different sort of thing, my dear madam,” he began.

“I am quite aware of that,” returned she.  “And I make allowances,
Captain Brown.”

“Just allow me to read you a scene out of this month’s number,” pleaded
he.  “I had it only this morning, and I don’t think the company can have
read it yet.”

“As you please,” said she, settling herself with an air of resignation.
He read the account of the “swarry” which Sam Weller gave at Bath.  Some
of us laughed heartily.  _I_ did not dare, because I was staying in the
house.  Miss Jenkyns sat in patient gravity.  When it was ended, she
turned to me, and said with mild dignity—

“Fetch me ‘Rasselas,’ my dear, out of the book-room.”

When I had brought it to her, she turned to Captain Brown—

“Now allow _me_ to read you a scene, and then the present company can
judge between your favourite, Mr Boz, and Dr Johnson.”

She read one of the conversations between Rasselas and Imlac, in a
high-pitched, majestic voice: and when she had ended, she said, “I
imagine I am now justified in my preference of Dr Johnson as a writer of
fiction.”  The Captain screwed his lips up, and drummed on the table,
but he did not speak.  She thought she would give him a finishing blow
or two.

         [Picture: Endeavouring to beguile her into conversation]

“I consider it vulgar, and below the dignity of literature, to publish
in numbers.”

“How was the _Rambler_ published, ma’am?” asked Captain Brown in a low
voice, which I think Miss Jenkyns could not have heard.

“Dr Johnson’s style is a model for young beginners.  My father
recommended it to me when I began to write letters—I have formed my own
style upon it; I recommended it to your favourite.”

“I should be very sorry for him to exchange his style for any such
pompous writing,” said Captain Brown.

Miss Jenkyns felt this as a personal affront, in a way of which the
Captain had not dreamed.  Epistolary writing she and her friends
considered as her _forte_.  Many a copy of many a letter have I seen
written and corrected on the slate, before she “seized the half-hour
just previous to post-time to assure” her friends of this or of that;
and Dr Johnson was, as she said, her model in these compositions.  She
drew herself up with dignity, and only replied to Captain Brown’s last
remark by saying, with marked emphasis on every syllable, “I prefer Dr
Johnson to Mr Boz.”

It is said—I won’t vouch for the fact—that Captain Brown was heard to
say, _sotto voce_, “D-n Dr Johnson!”  If he did, he was penitent
afterwards, as he showed by going to stand near Miss Jenkyns’ arm-chair,
and endeavouring to beguile her into conversation on some more pleasing
subject.  But she was inexorable.  The next day she made the remark I
have mentioned about Miss Jessie’s dimples.




CHAPTER II.
THE CAPTAIN


IT was impossible to live a month at Cranford and not know the daily
habits of each resident; and long before my visit was ended I knew much
concerning the whole Brown trio.  There was nothing new to be discovered
respecting their poverty; for they had spoken simply and openly about
that from the very first.  They made no mystery of the necessity for
their being economical.  All that remained to be discovered was the
Captain’s infinite kindness of heart, and the various modes in which,
unconsciously to himself, he manifested it.  Some little anecdotes were
talked about for some time after they occurred.  As we did not read
much, and as all the ladies were pretty well suited with servants, there
was a dearth of subjects for conversation.  We therefore discussed the
circumstance of the Captain taking a poor old woman’s dinner out of her
hands one very slippery Sunday.  He had met her returning from the
bakehouse as he came from church, and noticed her precarious footing;
and, with the grave dignity with which he did everything, he relieved
her of her burden, and steered along the street by her side, carrying
her baked mutton and potatoes safely home.  This was thought very
eccentric; and it was rather expected that he would pay a round of
calls, on the Monday morning, to explain and apologise to the Cranford
sense of propriety: but he did no such thing: and then it was decided
that he was ashamed, and was keeping out of sight.  In a kindly pity for
him, we began to say, “After all, the Sunday morning’s occurrence showed
great goodness of heart,” and it was resolved that he should be
comforted on his next appearance amongst us; but, lo! he came down upon
us, untouched by any sense of shame, speaking loud and bass as ever, his
head thrown back, his wig as jaunty and well-curled as usual, and we
were obliged to conclude he had forgotten all about Sunday.

Miss Pole and Miss Jessie Brown had set up a kind of intimacy on the
strength of the Shetland wool and the new knitting stitches; so it
happened that when I went to visit Miss Pole I saw more of the Browns
than I had done while staying with Miss Jenkyns, who had never got over
what she called Captain Brown’s disparaging remarks upon Dr Johnson as a
writer of light and agreeable fiction.  I found that Miss Brown was
seriously ill of some lingering, incurable complaint, the pain
occasioned by which gave the uneasy expression to her face that I had
taken for unmitigated crossness.  Cross, too, she was at times, when the
nervous irritability occasioned by her disease became past endurance.
Miss Jessie bore with her at these times, even more patiently than she
did with the bitter self-upbraidings by which they were invariably
succeeded. Miss Brown used to accuse herself, not merely of hasty and
irritable temper, but also of being the cause why her father and sister
were obliged to pinch, in order to allow her the small luxuries which
were necessaries in her condition.  She would so fain have made
sacrifices for them, and have lightened their cares, that the original
generosity of her disposition added acerbity to her temper.  All this
was borne by Miss Jessie and her father with more than placidity—with
absolute tenderness. I forgave Miss Jessie her singing out of tune, and
her juvenility of dress, when I saw her at home.  I came to perceive
that Captain Brown’s dark Brutus wig and padded coat (alas! too often
threadbare) were remnants of the military smartness of his youth, which
he now wore unconsciously.  He was a man of infinite resources, gained
in his barrack experience.  As he confessed, no one could black his
boots to please him except himself; but, indeed, he was not above saving
the little maid-servant’s labours in every way—knowing, most likely,
that his daughter’s illness made the place a hard one.

He endeavoured to make peace with Miss Jenkyns soon after the memorable
dispute I have named, by a present of a wooden fire-shovel (his own
making), having heard her say how much the grating of an iron one
annoyed her.  She received the present with cool gratitude, and thanked
him formally.  When he was gone, she bade me put it away in the
lumber-room; feeling, probably, that no present from a man who preferred
Mr Boz to Dr Johnson could be less jarring than an iron fire-shovel.

Such was the state of things when I left Cranford and went to Drumble.
I had, however, several correspondents, who kept me _au fait_ as to the
proceedings of the dear little town.  There was Miss Pole, who was
becoming as much absorbed in crochet as she had been once in knitting,
and the burden of whose letter was something like, “But don’t you forget
the white worsted at Flint’s” of the old song; for at the end of every
sentence of news came a fresh direction as to some crochet commission
which I was to execute for her.  Miss Matilda Jenkyns (who did not mind
being called Miss Matty, when Miss Jenkyns was not by) wrote nice, kind,
rambling letters, now and then venturing into an opinion of her own; but
suddenly pulling herself up, and either begging me not to name what she
had said, as Deborah thought differently, and _she_ knew, or else
putting in a postscript to the effect that, since writing the above, she
had been talking over the subject with Deborah, and was quite convinced
that, etc.—(here probably followed a recantation of every opinion she
had given in the letter).  Then came Miss Jenkyns—Deborah, as she liked
Miss Matty to call her, her father having once said that the Hebrew name
ought to be so pronounced.  I secretly think she took the Hebrew
prophetess for a model in character; and, indeed, she was not unlike the
stern prophetess in some ways, making allowance, of course, for modern
customs and difference in dress.  Miss Jenkyns wore a cravat, and a
little bonnet like a jockey-cap, and altogether had the appearance of a
strong-minded woman; although she would have despised the modern idea of
women being equal to men.  Equal, indeed! she knew they were superior.
But to return to her letters.  Everything in them was stately and grand
like herself. I have been looking them over (dear Miss Jenkyns, how I
honoured her!) and I will give an extract, more especially because it
relates to our friend Captain Brown:—

“The Honourable Mrs Jamieson has only just quitted me; and, in the
course of conversation, she communicated to me the intelligence that she
had yesterday received a call from her revered husband’s quondam friend,
Lord Mauleverer.  You will not easily conjecture what brought his
lordship within the precincts of our little town.  It was to see Captain
Brown, with whom, it appears, his lordship was acquainted in the ‘plumed
wars,’ and who had the privilege of averting destruction from his
lordship’s head when some great peril was impending over it, off the
misnomered Cape of Good Hope.  You know our friend the Honourable Mrs
Jamieson’s deficiency in the spirit of innocent curiosity, and you will
therefore not be so much surprised when I tell you she was quite unable
to disclose to me the exact nature of the peril in question.  I was
anxious, I confess, to ascertain in what manner Captain Brown, with his
limited establishment, could receive so distinguished a guest; and I
discovered that his lordship retired to rest, and, let us hope, to
refreshing slumbers, at the Angel Hotel; but shared the Brunonian meals
during the two days that he honoured Cranford with his august presence.
Mrs Johnson, our civil butcher’s wife, informs me that Miss Jessie
purchased a leg of lamb; but, besides this, I can hear of no preparation
whatever to give a suitable reception to so distinguished a visitor.
Perhaps they entertained him with ‘the feast of reason and the flow of
soul’; and to us, who are acquainted with Captain Brown’s sad want of
relish for ‘the pure wells of English undefiled,’ it may be matter for
congratulation that he has had the opportunity of improving his taste by
holding converse with an elegant and refined member of the British
aristocracy. But from some mundane failings who is altogether free?”

Miss Pole and Miss Matty wrote to me by the same post.  Such a piece of
news as Lord Mauleverer’s visit was not to be lost on the Cranford
letter-writers: they made the most of it.  Miss Matty humbly apologised
for writing at the same time as her sister, who was so much more capable
than she to describe the honour done to Cranford; but in spite of a
little bad spelling, Miss Matty’s account gave me the best idea of the
commotion occasioned by his lordship’s visit, after it had occurred;
for, except the people at the Angel, the Browns, Mrs Jamieson, and a
little lad his lordship had sworn at for driving a dirty hoop against
the aristocratic legs, I could not hear of any one with whom his
lordship had held conversation.

My next visit to Cranford was in the summer.  There had been neither
births, deaths, nor marriages since I was there last.  Everybody lived
in the same house, and wore pretty nearly the same well-preserved,
old-fashioned clothes.  The greatest event was, that Miss Jenkyns had
purchased a new carpet for the drawing-room.  Oh, the busy work Miss
Matty and I had in chasing the sunbeams, as they fell in an afternoon
right down on this carpet through the blindless window!  We spread
newspapers over the places and sat down to our book or our work; and,
lo! in a quarter of an hour the sun had moved, and was blazing away on a
fresh spot; and down again we went on our knees to alter the position of
the newspapers.  We were very busy, too, one whole morning, before Miss
Jenkyns gave her party, in following her directions, and in cutting out
and stitching together pieces of newspaper so as to form little paths to
every chair set for the expected visitors, lest their shoes might dirty
or defile the purity of the carpet.  Do you make paper paths for every
guest to walk upon in London?

Captain Brown and Miss Jenkyns were not very cordial to each other.  The
literary dispute, of which I had seen the beginning, was a “raw,” the
slightest touch on which made them wince.  It was the only difference of
opinion they had ever had; but that difference was enough.  Miss Jenkyns
could not refrain from talking at Captain Brown; and, though he did not
reply, he drummed with his fingers, which action she felt and resented
as very disparaging to Dr Johnson.  He was rather ostentatious in his
preference of the writings of Mr Boz; would walk through the streets so
absorbed in them that he all but ran against Miss Jenkyns; and though
his apologies were earnest and sincere, and though he did not, in fact,
do more than startle her and himself, she owned to me she had rather he
had knocked her down, if he had only been reading a higher style of
literature.  The poor, brave Captain! he looked older, and more worn,
and his clothes were very threadbare.  But he seemed as bright and
cheerful as ever, unless he was asked about his daughter’s health.

“She suffers a great deal, and she must suffer more: we do what we can
to alleviate her pain;—God’s will be done!”  He took off his hat at
these last words.  I found, from Miss Matty, that everything had been
done, in fact.  A medical man, of high repute in that country
neighbourhood, had been sent for, and every injunction he had given was
attended to, regardless of expense.  Miss Matty was sure they denied
themselves many things in order to make the invalid comfortable; but
they never spoke about it; and as for Miss Jessie!—“I really think she’s
an angel,” said poor Miss Matty, quite overcome.  “To see her way of
bearing with Miss Brown’s crossness, and the bright face she puts on
after she’s been sitting up a whole night and scolded above half of it,
is quite beautiful.  Yet she looks as neat and as ready to welcome the
Captain at breakfast-time as if she had been asleep in the Queen’s bed
all night. My dear! you could never laugh at her prim little curls or
her pink bows again if you saw her as I have done.”  I could only feel
very penitent, and greet Miss Jessie with double respect when I met her
next.  She looked faded and pinched; and her lips began to quiver, as if
she was very weak, when she spoke of her sister.  But she brightened,
and sent back the tears that were glittering in her pretty eyes, as she
said—

“But, to be sure, what a town Cranford is for kindness!  I don’t suppose
any one has a better dinner than usual cooked but the best part of all
comes in a little covered basin for my sister.  The poor people will
leave their earliest vegetables at our door for her.  They speak short
and gruff, as if they were ashamed of it: but I am sure it often goes to
my heart to see their thoughtfulness.”  The tears now came back and
overflowed; but after a minute or two she began to scold herself, and
ended by going away the same cheerful Miss Jessie as ever.

“But why does not this Lord Mauleverer do something for the man who
saved his life?” said I.

“Why, you see, unless Captain Brown has some reason for it, he never
speaks about being poor; and he walked along by his lordship looking as
happy and cheerful as a prince; and as they never called attention to
their dinner by apologies, and as Miss Brown was better that day, and
all seemed bright, I daresay his lordship never knew how much care there
was in the background.  He did send game in the winter pretty often, but
now he is gone abroad.”

I had often occasion to notice the use that was made of fragments and
small opportunities in Cranford; the rose-leaves that were gathered ere
they fell to make into a potpourri for someone who had no garden; the
little bundles of lavender flowers sent to strew the drawers of some
town-dweller, or to burn in the chamber of some invalid.  Things that
many would despise, and actions which it seemed scarcely worth while to
perform, were all attended to in Cranford.  Miss Jenkyns stuck an apple
full of cloves, to be heated and smell pleasantly in Miss Brown’s room;
and as she put in each clove she uttered a Johnsonian sentence.  Indeed,
she never could think of the Browns without talking Johnson; and, as
they were seldom absent from her thoughts just then, I heard many a
rolling, three-piled sentence.

Captain Brown called one day to thank Miss Jenkyns for many little
kindnesses, which I did not know until then that she had rendered.  He
had suddenly become like an old man; his deep bass voice had a quavering
in it, his eyes looked dim, and the lines on his face were deep.  He did
not—could not—speak cheerfully of his daughter’s state, but he talked
with manly, pious resignation, and not much.  Twice over he said, “What
Jessie has been to us, God only knows!” and after the second time, he
got up hastily, shook hands all round without speaking, and left the
room.

That afternoon we perceived little groups in the street, all listening
with faces aghast to some tale or other.  Miss Jenkyns wondered what
could be the matter for some time before she took the undignified step
of sending Jenny out to inquire.

Jenny came back with a white face of terror.  “Oh, ma’am!  Oh, Miss
Jenkyns, ma’am!  Captain Brown is killed by them nasty cruel railroads!”
and she burst into tears.  She, along with many others, had experienced
the poor Captain’s kindness.

“How?—where—where?  Good God!  Jenny, don’t waste time in crying, but
tell us something.”  Miss Matty rushed out into the street at once, and
collared the man who was telling the tale.

 [Picture: She brought the affrighted carter ... into the
drawing-room]

“Come in—come to my sister at once, Miss Jenkyns, the rector’s daughter.
Oh, man, man! say it is not true,” she cried, as she brought the
affrighted carter, sleeking down his hair, into the drawing-room, where
he stood with his wet boots on the new carpet, and no one regarded it.

“Please, mum, it is true.  I seed it myself,” and he shuddered at the
recollection.  “The Captain was a-reading some new book as he was deep
in, a-waiting for the down train; and there was a little lass as wanted
to come to its mammy, and gave its sister the slip, and came toddling
across the line.  And he looked up sudden, at the sound of the train
coming, and seed the child, and he darted on the line and cotched it up,
and his foot slipped, and the train came over him in no time.  O Lord,
Lord!  Mum, it’s quite true, and they’ve come over to tell his
daughters. The child’s safe, though, with only a bang on its shoulder as
he threw it to its mammy.  Poor Captain would be glad of that, mum,
wouldn’t he?  God bless him!”  The great rough carter puckered up his
manly face, and turned away to hide his tears.  I turned to Miss
Jenkyns.  She looked very ill, as if she were going to faint, and signed
to me to open the window.

“Matilda, bring me my bonnet.  I must go to those girls.  God pardon me,
if ever I have spoken contemptuously to the Captain!”

Miss Jenkyns arrayed herself to go out, telling Miss Matilda to give the
man a glass of wine.  While she was away, Miss Matty and I huddled over
the fire, talking in a low and awestruck voice.  I know we cried quietly
all the time.

Miss Jenkyns came home in a silent mood, and we durst not ask her many
questions.  She told us that Miss Jessie had fainted, and that she and
Miss Pole had had some difficulty in bringing her round; but that, as
soon as she recovered, she begged one of them to go and sit with her
sister.

“Mr Hoggins says she cannot live many days, and she shall be spared this
shock,” said Miss Jessie, shivering with feelings to which she dared not
give way.

“But how can you manage, my dear?” asked Miss Jenkyns; “you cannot bear
up, she must see your tears.”

“God will help me—I will not give way—she was asleep when the news came;
she may be asleep yet.  She would be so utterly miserable, not merely at
my father’s death, but to think of what would become of me; she is so
good to me.”  She looked up earnestly in their faces with her soft true
eyes, and Miss Pole told Miss Jenkyns afterwards she could hardly bear
it, knowing, as she did, how Miss Brown treated her sister.

However, it was settled according to Miss Jessie’s wish.  Miss Brown was
to be told her father had been summoned to take a short journey on
railway business.  They had managed it in some way—Miss Jenkyns could
not exactly say how.  Miss Pole was to stop with Miss Jessie.  Mrs
Jamieson had sent to inquire.  And this was all we heard that night; and
a sorrowful night it was.  The next day a full account of the fatal
accident was in the county paper which Miss Jenkyns took in.  Her eyes
were very weak, she said, and she asked me to read it.  When I came to
the “gallant gentleman was deeply engaged in the perusal of a number of
‘Pickwick,’ which he had just received,” Miss Jenkyns shook her head
long and solemnly, and then sighed out, “Poor, dear, infatuated man!”

The corpse was to be taken from the station to the parish church, there
to be interred.  Miss Jessie had set her heart on following it to the
grave; and no dissuasives could alter her resolve.  Her restraint upon
herself made her almost obstinate; she resisted all Miss Pole’s
entreaties and Miss Jenkyns’ advice.  At last Miss Jenkyns gave up the
point; and after a silence, which I feared portended some deep
displeasure against Miss Jessie, Miss Jenkyns said she should accompany
the latter to the funeral.

“It is not fit for you to go alone.  It would be against both propriety
and humanity were I to allow it.”

Miss Jessie seemed as if she did not half like this arrangement; but her
obstinacy, if she had any, had been exhausted in her determination to go
to the interment.  She longed, poor thing, I have no doubt, to cry alone
over the grave of the dear father to whom she had been all in all, and
to give way, for one little half-hour, uninterrupted by sympathy and
unobserved by friendship.  But it was not to be.  That afternoon Miss
Jenkyns sent out for a yard of black crape, and employed herself busily
in trimming the little black silk bonnet I have spoken about.  When it
was finished she put it on, and looked at us for approbation—admiration
she despised.  I was full of sorrow, but, by one of those whimsical
thoughts which come unbidden into our heads, in times of deepest grief,
I no sooner saw the bonnet than I was reminded of a helmet; and in that
hybrid bonnet, half helmet, half jockey-cap, did Miss Jenkyns attend
Captain Brown’s funeral, and, I believe, supported Miss Jessie with a
tender, indulgent firmness which was invaluable, allowing her to weep
her passionate fill before they left.

Miss Pole, Miss Matty, and I, meanwhile attended to Miss Brown: and hard
work we found it to relieve her querulous and never-ending complaints.
But if we were so weary and dispirited, what must Miss Jessie have been!
Yet she came back almost calm as if she had gained a new strength.  She
put off her mourning dress, and came in, looking pale and gentle,
thanking us each with a soft long pressure of the hand.  She could even
smile—a faint, sweet, wintry smile—as if to reassure us of her power to
endure; but her look made our eyes fill suddenly with tears, more than
if she had cried outright.

It was settled that Miss Pole was to remain with her all the watching
livelong night; and that Miss Matty and I were to return in the morning
to relieve them, and give Miss Jessie the opportunity for a few hours of
sleep.  But when the morning came, Miss Jenkyns appeared at the
breakfast-table, equipped in her helmet-bonnet, and ordered Miss Matty
to stay at home, as she meant to go and help to nurse.  She was
evidently in a state of great friendly excitement, which she showed by
eating her breakfast standing, and scolding the household all round.

No nursing—no energetic strong-minded woman could help Miss Brown now.
There was that in the room as we entered which was stronger than us all,
and made us shrink into solemn awestruck helplessness.  Miss Brown was
dying.  We hardly knew her voice, it was so devoid of the complaining
tone we had always associated with it.  Miss Jessie told me afterwards
that it, and her face too, were just what they had been formerly, when
her mother’s death left her the young anxious head of the family, of
whom only Miss Jessie survived.

She was conscious of her sister’s presence, though not, I think, of
ours. We stood a little behind the curtain: Miss Jessie knelt with her
face near her sister’s, in order to catch the last soft awful whispers.

“Oh, Jessie!  Jessie!  How selfish I have been!  God forgive me for
letting you sacrifice yourself for me as you did!  I have so loved
you—and yet I have thought only of myself.  God forgive me!”

“Hush, love! hush!” said Miss Jessie, sobbing.

“And my father, my dear, dear father!  I will not complain now, if God
will give me strength to be patient.  But, oh, Jessie! tell my father
how I longed and yearned to see him at last, and to ask his forgiveness.
 He can never know now how I loved him—oh! if I might but tell him,
before I die!  What a life of sorrow his has been, and I have done so
little to cheer him!”

A light came into Miss Jessie’s face.  “Would it comfort you, dearest,
to think that he does know?—would it comfort you, love, to know that his
cares, his sorrows”—Her voice quivered, but she steadied it into
calmness—“Mary! he has gone before you to the place where the weary are
at rest.  He knows now how you loved him.”

A strange look, which was not distress, came over Miss Brown’s face.
She did not speak for some time, but then we saw her lips form the
words, rather than heard the sound—“Father, mother, Harry, Archy;”—then,
as if it were a new idea throwing a filmy shadow over her darkened
mind—“But you will be alone, Jessie!”

Miss Jessie had been feeling this all during the silence, I think; for
the tears rolled down her cheeks like rain, at these words, and she
could not answer at first.  Then she put her hands together tight, and
lifted them up, and said—but not to us—“Though He slay me, yet will I
trust in Him.”

In a few moments more Miss Brown lay calm and still—never to sorrow or
murmur more.

After this second funeral, Miss Jenkyns insisted that Miss Jessie should
come to stay with her rather than go back to the desolate house, which,
in fact, we learned from Miss Jessie, must now be given up, as she had
not wherewithal to maintain it.  She had something above twenty pounds a
year, besides the interest of the money for which the furniture would
sell; but she could not live upon that: and so we talked over her
qualifications for earning money.

“I can sew neatly,” said she, “and I like nursing.  I think, too, I
could manage a house, if any one would try me as housekeeper; or I would
go into a shop as saleswoman, if they would have patience with me at
first.”

Miss Jenkyns declared, in an angry voice, that she should do no such
thing; and talked to herself about “some people having no idea of their
rank as a captain’s daughter,” nearly an hour afterwards, when she
brought Miss Jessie up a basin of delicately-made arrowroot, and stood
over her like a dragoon until the last spoonful was finished: then she
disappeared.  Miss Jessie began to tell me some more of the plans which
had suggested themselves to her, and insensibly fell into talking of the
days that were past and gone, and interested me so much I neither knew
nor heeded how time passed.  We were both startled when Miss Jenkyns
reappeared, and caught us crying.  I was afraid lest she would be
displeased, as she often said that crying hindered digestion, and I knew
she wanted Miss Jessie to get strong; but, instead, she looked queer and
excited, and fidgeted round us without saying anything.  At last she
spoke.

“I have been so much startled—no, I’ve not been at all startled—don’t
mind me, my dear Miss Jessie—I’ve been very much surprised—in fact, I’ve
had a caller, whom you knew once, my dear Miss Jessie”—

Miss Jessie went very white, then flushed scarlet, and looked eagerly at
Miss Jenkyns.

“A gentleman, my dear, who wants to know if you would see him.”

“Is it?—it is not”—stammered out Miss Jessie—and got no farther.

“This is his card,” said Miss Jenkyns, giving it to Miss Jessie; and
while her head was bent over it, Miss Jenkyns went through a series of
winks and odd faces to me, and formed her lips into a long sentence, of
which, of course, I could not understand a word.

“May he come up?” asked Miss Jenkyns at last.

“Oh, yes! certainly!” said Miss Jessie, as much as to say, this is your
house, you may show any visitor where you like.  She took up some
knitting of Miss Matty’s and began to be very busy, though I could see
how she trembled all over.

Miss Jenkyns rang the bell, and told the servant who answered it to show
Major Gordon upstairs; and, presently, in walked a tall, fine,
frank-looking man of forty or upwards.  He shook hands with Miss Jessie;
but he could not see her eyes, she kept them so fixed on the ground.
Miss Jenkyns asked me if I would come and help her to tie up the
preserves in the store-room; and though Miss Jessie plucked at my gown,
and even looked up at me with begging eye, I durst not refuse to go
where Miss Jenkyns asked.  Instead of tying up preserves in the
store-room, however, we went to talk in the dining-room; and there Miss
Jenkyns told me what Major Gordon had told her; how he had served in the
same regiment with Captain Brown, and had become acquainted with Miss
Jessie, then a sweet-looking, blooming girl of eighteen; how the
acquaintance had grown into love on his part, though it had been some
years before he had spoken; how, on becoming possessed, through the will
of an uncle, of a good estate in Scotland, he had offered and been
refused, though with so much agitation and evident distress that he was
sure she was not indifferent to him; and how he had discovered that the
obstacle was the fell disease which was, even then, too surely
threatening her sister. She had mentioned that the surgeons foretold
intense suffering; and there was no one but herself to nurse her poor
Mary, or cheer and comfort her father during the time of illness.  They
had had long discussions; and on her refusal to pledge herself to him as
his wife when all should be over, he had grown angry, and broken off
entirely, and gone abroad, believing that she was a cold-hearted person
whom he would do well to forget.  He had been travelling in the East,
and was on his return home when, at Rome, he saw the account of Captain
Brown’s death in _Galignani_.

Just then Miss Matty, who had been out all the morning, and had only
lately returned to the house, burst in with a face of dismay and
outraged propriety.

“Oh, goodness me!” she said.  “Deborah, there’s a gentleman sitting in
the drawing-room with his arm round Miss Jessie’s waist!”  Miss Matty’s
eyes looked large with terror.

          [Picture: “With his arm around Miss Jessie’s waist!”]

Miss Jenkyns snubbed her down in an instant.

“The most proper place in the world for his arm to be in.  Go away,
Matilda, and mind your own business.”  This from her sister, who had
hitherto been a model of feminine decorum, was a blow for poor Miss
Matty, and with a double shock she left the room.

The last time I ever saw poor Miss Jenkyns was many years after this.
Mrs Gordon had kept up a warm and affectionate intercourse with all at
Cranford.  Miss Jenkyns, Miss Matty, and Miss Pole had all been to visit
her, and returned with wonderful accounts of her house, her husband, her
dress, and her looks.  For, with happiness, something of her early bloom
returned; she had been a year or two younger than we had taken her for.
Her eyes were always lovely, and, as Mrs Gordon, her dimples were not
out of place.  At the time to which I have referred, when I last saw
Miss Jenkyns, that lady was old and feeble, and had lost something of
her strong mind.  Little Flora Gordon was staying with the Misses
Jenkyns, and when I came in she was reading aloud to Miss Jenkyns, who
lay feeble and changed on the sofa.  Flora put down the _Rambler_ when I
came in.

“Ah!” said Miss Jenkyns, “you find me changed, my dear.  I can’t see as
I used to do.  If Flora were not here to read to me, I hardly know how I
should get through the day.  Did you ever read the _Rambler_?  It’s a
wonderful book—wonderful! and the most improving reading for Flora”
(which I daresay it would have been, if she could have read half the
words without spelling, and could have understood the meaning of a
third), “better than that strange old book, with the queer name, poor
Captain Brown was killed for reading—that book by Mr Boz, you know—‘Old
Poz’; when I was a girl—but that’s a long time ago—I acted Lucy in ‘Old
Poz.’”  She babbled on long enough for Flora to get a good long spell at
the “Christmas Carol,” which Miss Matty had left on the table.




CHAPTER III.
A LOVE AFFAIR OF LONG AGO


I THOUGHT that probably my connection with Cranford would cease after
Miss Jenkyns’s death; at least, that it would have to be kept up by
correspondence, which bears much the same relation to personal
intercourse that the books of dried plants I sometimes see (“Hortus
Siccus,” I think they call the thing) do to the living and fresh flowers
in the lanes and meadows.  I was pleasantly surprised, therefore, by
receiving a letter from Miss Pole (who had always come in for a
supplementary week after my annual visit to Miss Jenkyns) proposing that
I should go and stay with her; and then, in a couple of days after my
acceptance, came a note from Miss Matty, in which, in a rather
circuitous and very humble manner, she told me how much pleasure I
should confer if I could spend a week or two with her, either before or
after I had been at Miss Pole’s; “for,” she said, “since my dear
sister’s death I am well aware I have no attractions to offer; it is
only to the kindness of my friends that I can owe their company.”

Of course I promised to come to dear Miss Matty as soon as I had ended
my visit to Miss Pole; and the day after my arrival at Cranford I went
to see her, much wondering what the house would be like without Miss
Jenkyns, and rather dreading the changed aspect of things.  Miss Matty
began to cry as soon as she saw me.  She was evidently nervous from
having anticipated my call.  I comforted her as well as I could; and I
found the best consolation I could give was the honest praise that came
from my heart as I spoke of the deceased.  Miss Matty slowly shook her
head over each virtue as it was named and attributed to her sister; and
at last she could not restrain the tears which had long been silently
flowing, but hid her face behind her handkerchief and sobbed aloud.

“Dear Miss Matty,” said I, taking her hand—for indeed I did not know in
what way to tell her how sorry I was for her, left deserted in the
world. She put down her handkerchief and said—

“My dear, I’d rather you did not call me Matty.  She did not like it;
but I did many a thing she did not like, I’m afraid—and now she’s gone!
If you please, my love, will you call me Matilda?”

I promised faithfully, and began to practise the new name with Miss Pole
that very day; and, by degrees, Miss Matilda’s feeling on the subject
was known through Cranford, and we all tried to drop the more familiar
name, but with so little success that by-and-by we gave up the attempt.

My visit to Miss Pole was very quiet.  Miss Jenkyns had so long taken
the lead in Cranford that now she was gone, they hardly knew how to give
a party.  The Honourable Mrs Jamieson, to whom Miss Jenkyns herself had
always yielded the post of honour, was fat and inert, and very much at
the mercy of her old servants.  If they chose that she should give a
party, they reminded her of the necessity for so doing: if not, she let
it alone.  There was all the more time for me to hear old-world stories
from Miss Pole, while she sat knitting, and I making my father’s shirts.
I always took a quantity of plain sewing to Cranford; for, as we did not
read much, or walk much, I found it a capital time to get through my
work.  One of Miss Pole’s stories related to a shadow of a love affair
that was dimly perceived or suspected long years before.

Presently, the time arrived when I was to remove to Miss Matilda’s
house. I found her timid and anxious about the arrangements for my
comfort. Many a time, while I was unpacking, did she come backwards and
forwards to stir the fire which burned all the worse for being so
frequently poked.

“Have you drawers enough, dear?” asked she.  “I don’t know exactly how
my sister used to arrange them.  She had capital methods.  I am sure she
would have trained a servant in a week to make a better fire than this,
and Fanny has been with me four months.”

This subject of servants was a standing grievance, and I could not
wonder much at it; for if gentlemen were scarce, and almost unheard of
in the “genteel society” of Cranford, they or their
counterparts—handsome young men—abounded in the lower classes.  The
pretty neat servant-maids had their choice of desirable “followers”; and
their mistresses, without having the sort of mysterious dread of men and
matrimony that Miss Matilda had, might well feel a little anxious lest
the heads of their comely maids should be turned by the joiner, or the
butcher, or the gardener, who were obliged, by their callings, to come
to the house, and who, as ill-luck would have it, were generally
handsome and unmarried. Fanny’s lovers, if she had any—and Miss Matilda
suspected her of so many flirtations that, if she had not been very
pretty, I should have doubted her having one—were a constant anxiety to
her mistress.  She was forbidden, by the articles of her engagement, to
have “followers”; and though she had answered, innocently enough,
doubling up the hem of her apron as she spoke, “Please, ma’am, I never
had more than one at a time,” Miss Matty prohibited that one.  But a
vision of a man seemed to haunt the kitchen.  Fanny assured me that it
was all fancy, or else I should have said myself that I had seen a man’s
coat-tails whisk into the scullery once, when I went on an errand into
the store-room at night; and another evening, when, our watches having
stopped, I went to look at the clock, there was a very odd appearance,
singularly like a young man squeezed up between the clock and the back
of the open kitchen door: and I thought Fanny snatched up the candle
very hastily, so as to throw the shadow on the clock face, while she
very positively told me the time half-an-hour too early, as we found out
afterwards by the church clock. But I did not add to Miss Matty’s
anxieties by naming my suspicions, especially as Fanny said to me, the
next day, that it was such a queer kitchen for having odd shadows about
it, she really was almost afraid to stay; “for you know, miss,” she
added, “I don’t see a creature from six o’clock tea, till Missus rings
the bell for prayers at ten.”

However, it so fell out that Fanny had to leave and Miss Matilda begged
me to stay and “settle her” with the new maid; to which I consented,
after I had heard from my father that he did not want me at home.  The
new servant was a rough, honest-looking, country girl, who had only
lived in a farm place before; but I liked her looks when she came to be
hired; and I promised Miss Matilda to put her in the ways of the house.
The said ways were religiously such as Miss Matilda thought her sister
would approve.  Many a domestic rule and regulation had been a subject
of plaintive whispered murmur to me during Miss Jenkyns’s life; but now
that she was gone, I do not think that even I, who was a favourite,
durst have suggested an alteration.  To give an instance: we constantly
adhered to the forms which were observed, at meal-times, in “my father,
the rector’s house.”  Accordingly, we had always wine and dessert; but
the decanters were only filled when there was a party, and what remained
was seldom touched, though we had two wine-glasses apiece every day
after dinner, until the next festive occasion arrived, when the state of
the remainder wine was examined into in a family council.  The dregs
were often given to the poor: but occasionally, when a good deal had
been left at the last party (five months ago, it might be), it was added
to some of a fresh bottle, brought up from the cellar.  I fancy poor
Captain Brown did not much like wine, for I noticed he never finished
his first glass, and most military men take several.  Then, as to our
dessert, Miss Jenkyns used to gather currants and gooseberries for it
herself, which I sometimes thought would have tasted better fresh from
the trees; but then, as Miss Jenkyns observed, there would have been
nothing for dessert in summer-time.  As it was, we felt very genteel
with our two glasses apiece, and a dish of gooseberries at the top, of
currants and biscuits at the sides, and two decanters at the bottom.
When oranges came in, a curious proceeding was gone through.  Miss
Jenkyns did not like to cut the fruit; for, as she observed, the juice
all ran out nobody knew where; sucking (only I think she used some more
recondite word) was in fact the only way of enjoying oranges; but then
there was the unpleasant association with a ceremony frequently gone
through by little babies; and so, after dessert, in orange season, Miss
Jenkyns and Miss Matty used to rise up, possess themselves each of an
orange in silence, and withdraw to the privacy of their own rooms to
indulge in sucking oranges.

I had once or twice tried, on such occasions, to prevail on Miss Matty
to stay, and had succeeded in her sister’s lifetime.  I held up a
screen, and did not look, and, as she said, she tried not to make the
noise very offensive; but now that she was left alone, she seemed quite
horrified when I begged her to remain with me in the warm
dining-parlour, and enjoy her orange as she liked best.  And so it was
in everything.  Miss Jenkyns’s rules were made more stringent than ever,
because the framer of them was gone where there could be no appeal.  In
all things else Miss Matilda was meek and undecided to a fault.  I have
heard Fanny turn her round twenty times in a morning about dinner, just
as the little hussy chose; and I sometimes fancied she worked on Miss
Matilda’s weakness in order to bewilder her, and to make her feel more
in the power of her clever servant.  I determined that I would not leave
her till I had seen what sort of a person Martha was; and, if I found
her trustworthy, I would tell her not to trouble her mistress with every
little decision.

Martha was blunt and plain-spoken to a fault; otherwise she was a brisk,
well-meaning, but very ignorant girl.  She had not been with us a week
before Miss Matilda and I were astounded one morning by the receipt of a
letter from a cousin of hers, who had been twenty or thirty years in
India, and who had lately, as we had seen by the “Army List,” returned
to England, bringing with him an invalid wife who had never been
introduced to her English relations.  Major Jenkyns wrote to propose
that he and his wife should spend a night at Cranford, on his way to
Scotland—at the inn, if it did not suit Miss Matilda to receive them
into her house; in which case they should hope to be with her as much as
possible during the day. Of course it _must_ suit her, as she said; for
all Cranford knew that she had her sister’s bedroom at liberty; but I am
sure she wished the Major had stopped in India and forgotten his cousins
out and out.

“Oh! how must I manage?” asked she helplessly.  “If Deborah had been
alive she would have known what to do with a gentleman-visitor.  Must I
put razors in his dressing-room?  Dear! dear! and I’ve got none.
Deborah would have had them.  And slippers, and coat-brushes?”  I
suggested that probably he would bring all these things with him.  “And
after dinner, how am I to know when to get up and leave him to his wine?
 Deborah would have done it so well; she would have been quite in her
element.  Will he want coffee, do you think?”  I undertook the
management of the coffee, and told her I would instruct Martha in the
art of waiting—in which it must be owned she was terribly deficient—and
that I had no doubt Major and Mrs Jenkyns would understand the quiet
mode in which a lady lived by herself in a country town.  But she was
sadly fluttered.  I made her empty her decanters and bring up two fresh
bottles of wine.  I wished I could have prevented her from being present
at my instructions to Martha, for she frequently cut in with some fresh
direction, muddling the poor girl’s mind as she stood open-mouthed,
listening to us both.

“Hand the vegetables round,” said I (foolishly, I see now—for it was
aiming at more than we could accomplish with quietness and simplicity);
and then, seeing her look bewildered, I added, “take the vegetables
round to people, and let them help themselves.”

“And mind you go first to the ladies,” put in Miss Matilda.  “Always go
to the ladies before gentlemen when you are waiting.”

“I’ll do it as you tell me, ma’am,” said Martha; “but I like lads best.”

We felt very uncomfortable and shocked at this speech of Martha’s, yet I
don’t think she meant any harm; and, on the whole, she attended very
well to our directions, except that she “nudged” the Major when he did
not help himself as soon as she expected to the potatoes, while she was
handing them round.

The major and his wife were quiet unpretending people enough when they
did come; languid, as all East Indians are, I suppose.  We were rather
dismayed at their bringing two servants with them, a Hindoo body-servant
for the Major, and a steady elderly maid for his wife; but they slept at
the inn, and took off a good deal of the responsibility by attending
carefully to their master’s and mistress’s comfort.  Martha, to be sure,
had never ended her staring at the East Indian’s white turban and brown
complexion, and I saw that Miss Matilda shrunk away from him a little as
he waited at dinner.  Indeed, she asked me, when they were gone, if he
did not remind me of Blue Beard?  On the whole, the visit was most
satisfactory, and is a subject of conversation even now with Miss
Matilda; at the time it greatly excited Cranford, and even stirred up
the apathetic and Honourable Mrs Jamieson to some expression of
interest, when I went to call and thank her for the kind answers she had
vouchsafed to Miss Matilda’s inquiries as to the arrangement of a
gentleman’s dressing-room—answers which I must confess she had given in
the wearied manner of the Scandinavian prophetess—

                       “Leave me, leave me to repose.”

And _now_ I come to the love affair.

It seems that Miss Pole had a cousin, once or twice removed, who had
offered to Miss Matty long ago.  Now this cousin lived four or five
miles from Cranford on his own estate; but his property was not large
enough to entitle him to rank higher than a yeoman; or rather, with
something of the “pride which apes humility,” he had refused to push
himself on, as so many of his class had done, into the ranks of the
squires.  He would not allow himself to be called Thomas Holbrook,
_Esq._; he even sent back letters with this address, telling the
post-mistress at Cranford that his name was _Mr_ Thomas Holbrook,
yeoman.  He rejected all domestic innovations; he would have the house
door stand open in summer and shut in winter, without knocker or bell to
summon a servant.  The closed fist or the knob of a stick did this
office for him if he found the door locked.  He despised every
refinement which had not its root deep down in humanity.  If people were
not ill, he saw no necessity for moderating his voice.  He spoke the
dialect of the country in perfection, and constantly used it in
conversation; although Miss Pole (who gave me these particulars) added,
that he read aloud more beautifully and with more feeling than any one
she had ever heard, except the late rector.

“And how came Miss Matilda not to marry him?” asked I.

“Oh, I don’t know.  She was willing enough, I think; but you know Cousin
Thomas would not have been enough of a gentleman for the rector and Miss
Jenkyns.”

“Well! but they were not to marry him,” said I, impatiently.

“No; but they did not like Miss Matty to marry below her rank.  You know
she was the rector’s daughter, and somehow they are related to Sir Peter
Arley: Miss Jenkyns thought a deal of that.”

“Poor Miss Matty!” said I.

“Nay, now, I don’t know anything more than that he offered and was
refused.  Miss Matty might not like him—and Miss Jenkyns might never
have said a word—it is only a guess of mine.”

“Has she never seen him since?” I inquired.

“No, I think not.  You see Woodley, Cousin Thomas’s house, lies half-way
between Cranford and Misselton; and I know he made Misselton his
market-town very soon after he had offered to Miss Matty; and I don’t
think he has been into Cranford above once or twice since—once, when I
was walking with Miss Matty, in High Street, and suddenly she darted
from me, and went up Shire Lane.  A few minutes after I was startled by
meeting Cousin Thomas.”

“How old is he?” I asked, after a pause of castle-building.

“He must be about seventy, I think, my dear,” said Miss Pole, blowing up
my castle, as if by gun-powder, into small fragments.

Very soon after—at least during my long visit to Miss Matilda—I had the
opportunity of seeing Mr Holbrook; seeing, too, his first encounter with
his former love, after thirty or forty years’ separation.  I was helping
to decide whether any of the new assortment of coloured silks which they
had just received at the shop would do to match a grey and black
mousseline-delaine that wanted a new breadth, when a tall, thin, Don
Quixote-looking old man came into the shop for some woollen gloves.  I
had never seen the person (who was rather striking) before, and I
watched him rather attentively while Miss Matty listened to the shopman.
 The stranger wore a blue coat with brass buttons, drab breeches, and
gaiters, and drummed with his fingers on the counter until he was
attended to. When he answered the shop-boy’s question, “What can I have
the pleasure of showing you to-day, sir?” I saw Miss Matilda start, and
then suddenly sit down; and instantly I guessed who it was.  She had
made some inquiry which had to be carried round to the other shopman.

“Miss Jenkyns wants the black sarsenet two-and-twopence the yard”; and
Mr Holbrook had caught the name, and was across the shop in two strides.

“Matty—Miss Matilda—Miss Jenkyns!  God bless my soul!  I should not have
known you.  How are you? how are you?”  He kept shaking her hand in a
way which proved the warmth of his friendship; but he repeated so often,
as if to himself, “I should not have known you!” that any sentimental
romance which I might be inclined to build was quite done away with by
his manner.

However, he kept talking to us all the time we were in the shop; and
then waving the shopman with the unpurchased gloves on one side, with
“Another time, sir! another time!” he walked home with us.  I am happy
to say my client, Miss Matilda, also left the shop in an equally
bewildered state, not having purchased either green or red silk.  Mr
Holbrook was evidently full with honest loud-spoken joy at meeting his
old love again; he touched on the changes that had taken place; he even
spoke of Miss Jenkyns as “Your poor sister!  Well, well! we have all our
faults”; and bade us good-bye with many a hope that he should soon see
Miss Matty again.  She went straight to her room, and never came back
till our early tea-time, when I thought she looked as if she had been
crying.

              [Picture: Mr Holbrook ... bade us good-bye]




CHAPTER IV.
A VISIT TO AN OLD BACHELOR


A FEW days after, a note came from Mr Holbrook, asking us—impartially
asking both of us—in a formal, old-fashioned style, to spend a day at
his house—a long June day—for it was June now.  He named that he had
also invited his cousin, Miss Pole; so that we might join in a fly,
which could be put up at his house.

I expected Miss Matty to jump at this invitation; but, no!  Miss Pole
and I had the greatest difficulty in persuading her to go.  She thought
it was improper; and was even half annoyed when we utterly ignored the
idea of any impropriety in her going with two other ladies to see her
old lover.  Then came a more serious difficulty.  She did not think
Deborah would have liked her to go.  This took us half a day’s good hard
talking to get over; but, at the first sentence of relenting, I seized
the opportunity, and wrote and despatched an acceptance in her
name—fixing day and hour, that all might be decided and done with.

The next morning she asked me if I would go down to the shop with her;
and there, after much hesitation, we chose out three caps to be sent
home and tried on, that the most becoming might be selected to take with
us on Thursday.

She was in a state of silent agitation all the way to Woodley.  She had
evidently never been there before; and, although she little dreamt I
knew anything of her early story, I could perceive she was in a tremor
at the thought of seeing the place which might have been her home, and
round which it is probable that many of her innocent girlish
imaginations had clustered.  It was a long drive there, through paved
jolting lanes.  Miss Matilda sat bolt upright, and looked wistfully out
of the windows as we drew near the end of our journey.  The aspect of
the country was quiet and pastoral.  Woodley stood among fields; and
there was an old-fashioned garden where roses and currant-bushes touched
each other, and where the feathery asparagus formed a pretty background
to the pinks and gilly-flowers; there was no drive up to the door.  We
got out at a little gate, and walked up a straight box-edged path.

“My cousin might make a drive, I think,” said Miss Pole, who was afraid
of ear-ache, and had only her cap on.

“I think it is very pretty,” said Miss Matty, with a soft plaintiveness
in her voice, and almost in a whisper, for just then Mr Holbrook
appeared at the door, rubbing his hands in very effervescence of
hospitality.  He looked more like my idea of Don Quixote than ever, and
yet the likeness was only external.  His respectable housekeeper stood
modestly at the door to bid us welcome; and, while she led the elder
ladies upstairs to a bedroom, I begged to look about the garden.  My
request evidently pleased the old gentleman, who took me all round the
place and showed me his six-and-twenty cows, named after the different
letters of the alphabet. As we went along, he surprised me occasionally
by repeating apt and beautiful quotations from the poets, ranging easily
from Shakespeare and George Herbert to those of our own day.  He did
this as naturally as if he were thinking aloud, and their true and
beautiful words were the best expression he could find for what he was
thinking or feeling.  To be sure he called Byron “my Lord Byrron,” and
pronounced the name of Goethe strictly in accordance with the English
sound of the letters—“As Goethe says, ‘Ye ever-verdant palaces,’” &c.
Altogether, I never met with a man, before or since, who had spent so
long a life in a secluded and not impressive country, with
ever-increasing delight in the daily and yearly change of season and
beauty.

When he and I went in, we found that dinner was nearly ready in the
kitchen—for so I suppose the room ought to be called, as there were oak
dressers and cupboards all round, all over by the side of the fireplace,
and only a small Turkey carpet in the middle of the flag-floor.  The
room might have been easily made into a handsome dark oak dining-parlour
by removing the oven and a few other appurtenances of a kitchen, which
were evidently never used, the real cooking-place being at some
distance.  The room in which we were expected to sit was a
stiffly-furnished, ugly apartment; but that in which we did sit was what
Mr Holbrook called the counting-house, where he paid his labourers their
weekly wages at a great desk near the door.  The rest of the pretty
sitting-room—looking into the orchard, and all covered over with dancing
tree-shadows—was filled with books.  They lay on the ground, they
covered the walls, they strewed the table.  He was evidently half
ashamed and half proud of his extravagance in this respect.  They were
of all kinds—poetry and wild weird tales prevailing.  He evidently chose
his books in accordance with his own tastes, not because such and such
were classical or established favourites.

“Ah!” he said, “we farmers ought not to have much time for reading; yet
somehow one can’t help it.”

“What a pretty room!” said Miss Matty, _sotto voce_.

“What a pleasant place!” said I, aloud, almost simultaneously.

“Nay! if you like it,” replied he; “but can you sit on these great,
black leather, three-cornered chairs?  I like it better than the best
parlour; but I thought ladies would take that for the smarter place.”

It was the smarter place, but, like most smart things, not at all
pretty, or pleasant, or home-like; so, while we were at dinner, the
servant-girl dusted and scrubbed the counting-house chairs, and we sat
there all the rest of the day.

We had pudding before meat; and I thought Mr Holbrook was going to make
some apology for his old-fashioned ways, for he began—

“I don’t know whether you like newfangled ways.”

“Oh, not at all!” said Miss Matty.

“No more do I,” said he.  “My housekeeper _will_ have these in her new
fashion; or else I tell her that, when I was a young man, we used to
keep strictly to my father’s rule, ‘No broth, no ball; no ball, no
beef’; and always began dinner with broth.  Then we had suet puddings,
boiled in the broth with the beef: and then the meat itself.  If we did
not sup our broth, we had no ball, which we liked a deal better; and the
beef came last of all, and only those had it who had done justice to the
broth and the ball.  Now folks begin with sweet things, and turn their
dinners topsy-turvy.”

When the ducks and green peas came, we looked at each other in dismay;
we had only two-pronged, black-handled forks.  It is true the steel was
as bright as silver; but what were we to do?  Miss Matty picked up her
peas, one by one, on the point of the prongs, much as Aminé ate her
grains of rice after her previous feast with the Ghoul.  Miss Pole
sighed over her delicate young peas as she left them on one side of her
plate untasted, for they _would_ drop between the prongs.  I looked at
my host: the peas were going wholesale into his capacious mouth,
shovelled up by his large round-ended knife.  I saw, I imitated, I
survived!  My friends, in spite of my precedent, could not muster up
courage enough to do an ungenteel thing; and, if Mr Holbrook had not
been so heartily hungry, he would probably have seen that the good peas
went away almost untouched.

After dinner, a clay pipe was brought in, and a spittoon; and, asking us
to retire to another room, where he would soon join us, if we disliked
tobacco-smoke, he presented his pipe to Miss Matty, and requested her to
fill the bowl.  This was a compliment to a lady in his youth; but it was
rather inappropriate to propose it as an honour to Miss Matty, who had
been trained by her sister to hold smoking of every kind in utter
abhorrence.  But if it was a shock to her refinement, it was also a
gratification to her feelings to be thus selected; so she daintily
stuffed the strong tobacco into the pipe, and then we withdrew.

“It is very pleasant dining with a bachelor,” said Miss Matty softly, as
we settled ourselves in the counting-house.  “I only hope it is not
improper; so many pleasant things are!”

“What a number of books he has!” said Miss Pole, looking round the room.
“And how dusty they are!”

“I think it must be like one of the great Dr Johnson’s rooms,” said Miss
Matty.  “What a superior man your cousin must be!”

“Yes!” said Miss Pole, “he’s a great reader; but I am afraid he has got
into very uncouth habits with living alone.”

“Oh! uncouth is too hard a word.  I should call him eccentric; very
clever people always are!” replied Miss Matty.

            [Picture: Now, what colour are ash-buds in March]

When Mr Holbrook returned, he proposed a walk in the fields; but the two
elder ladies were afraid of damp, and dirt, and had only very unbecoming
calashes to put on over their caps; so they declined, and I was again
his companion in a turn which he said he was obliged to take to see
after his men.  He strode along, either wholly forgetting my existence,
or soothed into silence by his pipe—and yet it was not silence exactly.
He walked before me with a stooping gait, his hands clasped behind him;
and, as some tree or cloud, or glimpse of distant upland pastures,
struck him, he quoted poetry to himself, saying it out loud in a grand
sonorous voice, with just the emphasis that true feeling and
appreciation give.  We came upon an old cedar tree, which stood at one
end of the house—

    “The cedar spreads his dark-green layers of shade.”

“Capital term—‘layers!’  Wonderful man!”  I did not know whether he was
speaking to me or not; but I put in an assenting “wonderful,” although I
knew nothing about it, just because I was tired of being forgotten, and
of being consequently silent.

He turned sharp round.  “Ay! you may say ‘wonderful.’  Why, when I saw
the review of his poems in _Blackwood_, I set off within an hour, and
walked seven miles to Misselton (for the horses were not in the way) and
ordered them.  Now, what colour are ash-buds in March?”

Is the man going mad? thought I.  He is very like Don Quixote.

“What colour are they, I say?” repeated he vehemently.

“I am sure I don’t know, sir,” said I, with the meekness of ignorance.

“I knew you didn’t.  No more did I—an old fool that I am!—till this
young man comes and tells me.  Black as ash-buds in March.  And I’ve
lived all my life in the country; more shame for me not to know.  Black:
they are jet-black, madam.”  And he went off again, swinging along to
the music of some rhyme he had got hold of.

When we came back, nothing would serve him but he must read us the poems
he had been speaking of; and Miss Pole encouraged him in his proposal, I
thought, because she wished me to hear his beautiful reading, of which
she had boasted; but she afterwards said it was because she had got to a
difficult part of her crochet, and wanted to count her stitches without
having to talk.  Whatever he had proposed would have been right to Miss
Matty; although she did fall sound asleep within five minutes after he
had begun a long poem, called “Locksley Hall,” and had a comfortable
nap, unobserved, till he ended; when the cessation of his voice wakened
her up, and she said, feeling that something was expected, and that Miss
Pole was counting—

“What a pretty book!”

“Pretty, madam! it’s beautiful!  Pretty, indeed!”

“Oh yes!  I meant beautiful!” said she, fluttered at his disapproval of
her word.  “It is so like that beautiful poem of Dr Johnson’s my sister
used to read—I forget the name of it; what was it, my dear?” turning to
me.

“Which do you mean, ma’am?  What was it about?”

“I don’t remember what it was about, and I’ve quite forgotten what the
name of it was; but it was written by Dr Johnson, and was very
beautiful, and very like what Mr Holbrook has just been reading.”

“I don’t remember it,” said he reflectively.  “But I don’t know Dr
Johnson’s poems well.  I must read them.”

As we were getting into the fly to return, I heard Mr Holbrook say he
should call on the ladies soon, and inquire how they got home; and this
evidently pleased and fluttered Miss Matty at the time he said it; but
after we had lost sight of the old house among the trees her sentiments
towards the master of it were gradually absorbed into a distressing
wonder as to whether Martha had broken her word, and seized on the
opportunity of her mistress’s absence to have a “follower.”  Martha
looked good, and steady, and composed enough, as she came to help us
out; she was always careful of Miss Matty, and to-night she made use of
this unlucky speech—

“Eh! dear ma’am, to think of your going out in an evening in such a thin
shawl!  It’s no better than muslin.  At your age, ma’am, you should be
careful.”

“My age!” said Miss Matty, almost speaking crossly, for her, for she was
usually gentle—“My age!  Why, how old do you think I am, that you talk
about my age?”

“Well, ma’am, I should say you were not far short of sixty: but folks’
looks is often against them—and I’m sure I meant no harm.”

“Martha, I’m not yet fifty-two!” said Miss Matty, with grave emphasis;
for probably the remembrance of her youth had come very vividly before
her this day, and she was annoyed at finding that golden time so far
away in the past.

But she never spoke of any former and more intimate acquaintance with Mr
Holbrook.  She had probably met with so little sympathy in her early
love, that she had shut it up close in her heart; and it was only by a
sort of watching, which I could hardly avoid since Miss Pole’s
confidence, that I saw how faithful her poor heart had been in its
sorrow and its silence.

She gave me some good reason for wearing her best cap every day, and sat
near the window, in spite of her rheumatism, in order to see, without
being seen, down into the street.

He came.  He put his open palms upon his knees, which were far apart, as
he sat with his head bent down, whistling, after we had replied to his
inquiries about our safe return.  Suddenly he jumped up—

“Well, madam! have you any commands for Paris?  I am going there in a
week or two.”

“To Paris!” we both exclaimed.

“Yes, madam!  I’ve never been there, and always had a wish to go; and I
think if I don’t go soon, I mayn’t go at all; so as soon as the hay is
got in I shall go, before harvest time.”

We were so much astonished that we had no commissions.

Just as he was going out of the room, he turned back, with his favourite
exclamation—

“God bless my soul, madam! but I nearly forgot half my errand.  Here are
the poems for you you admired so much the other evening at my house.”
He tugged away at a parcel in his coat-pocket.  “Good-bye, miss,” said
he; “good-bye, Matty! take care of yourself.”  And he was gone.  But he
had given her a book, and he had called her Matty, just as he used to do
thirty years ago.

“I wish he would not go to Paris,” said Miss Matilda anxiously.  “I
don’t believe frogs will agree with him; he used to have to be very
careful what he ate, which was curious in so strong-looking a young
man.”

Soon after this I took my leave, giving many an injunction to Martha to
look after her mistress, and to let me know if she thought that Miss
Matilda was not so well; in which case I would volunteer a visit to my
old friend, without noticing Martha’s intelligence to her.

Accordingly I received a line or two from Martha every now and then;
and, about November I had a note to say her mistress was “very low and
sadly off her food”; and the account made me so uneasy that, although
Martha did not decidedly summon me, I packed up my things and went.

I received a warm welcome, in spite of the little flurry produced by my
impromptu visit, for I had only been able to give a day’s notice.  Miss
Matilda looked miserably ill; and I prepared to comfort and cosset her.

I went down to have a private talk with Martha.

“How long has your mistress been so poorly?” I asked, as I stood by the
kitchen fire.

“Well!  I think it’s better than a fortnight; it is, I know; it was one
Tuesday, after Miss Pole had been, that she went into this moping way.
I thought she was tired, and it would go off with a night’s rest; but
no! she has gone on and on ever since, till I thought it my duty to
write to you, ma’am.”

“You did quite right, Martha.  It is a comfort to think she has so
faithful a servant about her.  And I hope you find your place
comfortable?”

“Well, ma’am, missus is very kind, and there’s plenty to eat and drink,
and no more work but what I can do easily—but—” Martha hesitated.

“But what, Martha?”

“Why, it seems so hard of missus not to let me have any followers;
there’s such lots of young fellows in the town; and many a one has as
much as offered to keep company with me; and I may never be in such a
likely place again, and it’s like wasting an opportunity.  Many a girl
as I know would have ’em unbeknownst to missus; but I’ve given my word,
and I’ll stick to it; or else this is just the house for missus never to
be the wiser if they did come: and it’s such a capable kitchen—there’s
such dark corners in it—I’d be bound to hide any one.  I counted up last
Sunday night—for I’ll not deny I was crying because I had to shut the
door in Jem Hearn’s face, and he’s a steady young man, fit for any girl;
only I had given missus my word.”  Martha was all but crying again; and
I had little comfort to give her, for I knew, from old experience, of
the horror with which both the Miss Jenkynses looked upon “followers”;
and in Miss Matty’s present nervous state this dread was not likely to
be lessened.

I went to see Miss Pole the next day, and took her completely by
surprise, for she had not been to see Miss Matilda for two days.

“And now I must go back with you, my dear, for I promised to let her
know how Thomas Holbrook went on; and, I’m sorry to say, his housekeeper
has sent me word to-day that he hasn’t long to live.  Poor Thomas! that
journey to Paris was quite too much for him.  His housekeeper says he
has hardly ever been round his fields since, but just sits with his
hands on his knees in the counting-house, not reading or anything, but
only saying what a wonderful city Paris was!  Paris has much to answer
for if it’s killed my cousin Thomas, for a better man never lived.”

“Does Miss Matilda know of his illness?” asked I—a new light as to the
cause of her indisposition dawning upon me.

“Dear! to be sure, yes!  Has not she told you?  I let her know a
fortnight ago, or more, when first I heard of it.  How odd she shouldn’t
have told you!”

Not at all, I thought; but I did not say anything.  I felt almost guilty
of having spied too curiously into that tender heart, and I was not
going to speak of its secrets—hidden, Miss Matty believed, from all the
world. I ushered Miss Pole into Miss Matilda’s little drawing-room, and
then left them alone.  But I was not surprised when Martha came to my
bedroom door, to ask me to go down to dinner alone, for that missus had
one of her bad headaches.  She came into the drawing-room at tea-time,
but it was evidently an effort to her; and, as if to make up for some
reproachful feeling against her late sister, Miss Jenkyns, which had
been troubling her all the afternoon, and for which she now felt
penitent, she kept telling me how good and how clever Deborah was in her
youth; how she used to settle what gowns they were to wear at all the
parties (faint, ghostly ideas of grim parties, far away in the distance,
when Miss Matty and Miss Pole were young!); and how Deborah and her
mother had started the benefit society for the poor, and taught girls
cooking and plain sewing; and how Deborah had once danced with a lord;
and how she used to visit at Sir Peter Arley’s, and tried to remodel the
quiet rectory establishment on the plans of Arley Hall, where they kept
thirty servants; and how she had nursed Miss Matty through a long, long
illness, of which I had never heard before, but which I now dated in my
own mind as following the dismissal of the suit of Mr Holbrook.  So we
talked softly and quietly of old times through the long November
evening.

The next day Miss Pole brought us word that Mr Holbrook was dead.  Miss
Matty heard the news in silence; in fact, from the account of the
previous day, it was only what we had to expect.  Miss Pole kept calling
upon us for some expression of regret, by asking if it was not sad that
he was gone, and saying—

“To think of that pleasant day last June, when he seemed so well!  And
he might have lived this dozen years if he had not gone to that wicked
Paris, where they are always having revolutions.”

She paused for some demonstration on our part.  I saw Miss Matty could
not speak, she was trembling so nervously; so I said what I really felt;
and after a call of some duration—all the time of which I have no doubt
Miss Pole thought Miss Matty received the news very calmly—our visitor
took her leave.

Miss Matty made a strong effort to conceal her feelings—a concealment
she practised even with me, for she has never alluded to Mr Holbrook
again, although the book he gave her lies with her Bible on the little
table by her bedside.  She did not think I heard her when she asked the
little milliner of Cranford to make her caps something like the
Honourable Mrs Jamieson’s, or that I noticed the reply—

“But she wears widows’ caps, ma’am?”

“Oh!  I only meant something in that style; not widows’, of course, but
rather like Mrs Jamieson’s.”

This effort at concealment was the beginning of the tremulous motion of
head and hands which I have seen ever since in Miss Matty.

The evening of the day on which we heard of Mr Holbrook’s death, Miss
Matilda was very silent and thoughtful; after prayers she called Martha
back and then she stood uncertain what to say.

“Martha!” she said, at last, “you are young”—and then she made so long a
pause that Martha, to remind her of her half-finished sentence, dropped
a curtsey, and said—

“Yes, please, ma’am; two-and-twenty last third of October, please,
ma’am.”

“And, perhaps, Martha, you may some time meet with a young man you like,
and who likes you.  I did say you were not to have followers; but if
you meet with such a young man, and tell me, and I find he is
respectable, I have no objection to his coming to see you once a week.
God forbid!” said she in a low voice, “that I should grieve any young
hearts.”  She spoke as if she were providing for some distant
contingency, and was rather startled when Martha made her ready eager
answer—

“Please, ma’am, there’s Jem Hearn, and he’s a joiner making
three-and-sixpence a-day, and six foot one in his stocking-feet, please,
ma’am; and if you’ll ask about him to-morrow morning, every one will
give him a character for steadiness; and he’ll be glad enough to come
to-morrow night, I’ll be bound.”

Though Miss Matty was startled, she submitted to Fate and Love.




CHAPTER V.
OLD LETTERS


I HAVE often noticed that almost every one has his own individual small
economies—careful habits of saving fractions of pennies in some one
peculiar direction—any disturbance of which annoys him more than
spending shillings or pounds on some real extravagance.  An old
gentleman of my acquaintance, who took the intelligence of the failure
of a Joint-Stock Bank, in which some of his money was invested, with
stoical mildness, worried his family all through a long summer’s day
because one of them had torn (instead of cutting) out the written leaves
of his now useless bank-book; of course, the corresponding pages at the
other end came out as well, and this little unnecessary waste of paper
(his private economy) chafed him more than all the loss of his money.
Envelopes fretted his soul terribly when they first came in; the only
way in which he could reconcile himself to such waste of his cherished
article was by patiently turning inside out all that were sent to him,
and so making them serve again.  Even now, though tamed by age, I see
him casting wistful glances at his daughters when they send a whole
inside of a half-sheet of note paper, with the three lines of acceptance
to an invitation, written on only one of the sides.  I am not above
owning that I have this human weakness myself.  String is my foible.  My
pockets get full of little hanks of it, picked up and twisted together,
ready for uses that never come.  I am seriously annoyed if any one cuts
the string of a parcel instead of patiently and faithfully undoing it
fold by fold.  How people can bring themselves to use india-rubber
rings, which are a sort of deification of string, as lightly as they do,
I cannot imagine.  To me an india-rubber ring is a precious treasure.  I
have one which is not new—one that I picked up off the floor nearly six
years ago.  I have really tried to use it, but my heart failed me, and I
could not commit the extravagance.

Small pieces of butter grieve others.  They cannot attend to
conversation because of the annoyance occasioned by the habit which some
people have of invariably taking more butter than they want.  Have you
not seen the anxious look (almost mesmeric) which such persons fix on
the article? They would feel it a relief if they might bury it out of
their sight by popping it into their own mouths and swallowing it down;
and they are really made happy if the person on whose plate it lies
unused suddenly breaks off a piece of toast (which he does not want at
all) and eats up his butter.  They think that this is not waste.

Now Miss Matty Jenkyns was chary of candles.  We had many devices to use
as few as possible.  In the winter afternoons she would sit knitting for
two or three hours—she could do this in the dark, or by firelight—and
when I asked if I might not ring for candles to finish stitching my
wristbands, she told me to “keep blind man’s holiday.”  They were
usually brought in with tea; but we only burnt one at a time.  As we
lived in constant preparation for a friend who might come in any evening
(but who never did), it required some contrivance to keep our two
candles of the same length, ready to be lighted, and to look as if we
burnt two always. The candles took it in turns; and, whatever we might
be talking about or doing, Miss Matty’s eyes were habitually fixed upon
the candle, ready to jump up and extinguish it and to light the other
before they had become too uneven in length to be restored to equality
in the course of the evening.

One night, I remember this candle economy particularly annoyed me.  I
had been very much tired of my compulsory “blind man’s holiday,”
especially as Miss Matty had fallen asleep, and I did not like to stir
the fire and run the risk of awakening her; so I could not even sit on
the rug, and scorch myself with sewing by firelight, according to my
usual custom.  I fancied Miss Matty must be dreaming of her early life;
for she spoke one or two words in her uneasy sleep bearing reference to
persons who were dead long before.  When Martha brought in the lighted
candle and tea, Miss Matty started into wakefulness, with a strange,
bewildered look around, as if we were not the people she expected to see
about her. There was a little sad expression that shadowed her face as
she recognised me; but immediately afterwards she tried to give me her
usual smile.  All through tea-time her talk ran upon the days of her
childhood and youth.  Perhaps this reminded her of the desirableness of
looking over all the old family letters, and destroying such as ought
not to be allowed to fall into the hands of strangers; for she had often
spoken of the necessity of this task, but had always shrunk from it,
with a timid dread of something painful.  To-night, however, she rose up
after tea and went for them—in the dark; for she piqued herself on the
precise neatness of all her chamber arrangements, and used to look
uneasily at me when I lighted a bed-candle to go to another room for
anything.  When she returned there was a faint, pleasant smell of
Tonquin beans in the room. I had always noticed this scent about any of
the things which had belonged to her mother; and many of the letters
were addressed to her—yellow bundles of love-letters, sixty or seventy
years old.

Miss Matty undid the packet with a sigh; but she stifled it directly, as
if it were hardly right to regret the flight of time, or of life either.
We agreed to look them over separately, each taking a different letter
out of the same bundle and describing its contents to the other before
destroying it.  I never knew what sad work the reading of old letters
was before that evening, though I could hardly tell why.  The letters
were as happy as letters could be—at least those early letters were.
There was in them a vivid and intense sense of the present time, which
seemed so strong and full, as if it could never pass away, and as if the
warm, living hearts that so expressed themselves could never die, and be
as nothing to the sunny earth.  I should have felt less melancholy, I
believe, if the letters had been more so.  I saw the tears stealing down
the well-worn furrows of Miss Matty’s cheeks, and her spectacles often
wanted wiping.  I trusted at last that she would light the other candle,
for my own eyes were rather dim, and I wanted more light to see the
pale, faded ink; but no, even through her tears, she saw and remembered
her little economical ways.

The earliest set of letters were two bundles tied together, and ticketed
(in Miss Jenkyns’s handwriting) “Letters interchanged between my
ever-honoured father and my dearly-beloved mother, prior to their
marriage, in July 1774.”  I should guess that the rector of Cranford was
about twenty-seven years of age when he wrote those letters; and Miss
Matty told me that her mother was just eighteen at the time of her
wedding.  With my idea of the rector derived from a picture in the
dining-parlour, stiff and stately, in a huge full-bottomed wig, with
gown, cassock, and bands, and his hand upon a copy of the only sermon he
ever published—it was strange to read these letters.  They were full of
eager, passionate ardour; short homely sentences, right fresh from the
heart (very different from the grand Latinised, Johnsonian style of the
printed sermon preached before some judge at assize time).  His letters
were a curious contrast to those of his girl-bride.  She was evidently
rather annoyed at his demands upon her for expressions of love, and
could not quite understand what he meant by repeating the same thing
over in so many different ways; but what she was quite clear about was a
longing for a white “Paduasoy”—whatever that might be; and six or seven
letters were principally occupied in asking her lover to use his
influence with her parents (who evidently kept her in good order) to
obtain this or that article of dress, more especially the white
“Paduasoy.”  He cared nothing how she was dressed; she was always lovely
enough for him, as he took pains to assure her, when she begged him to
express in his answers a predilection for particular pieces of finery,
in order that she might show what he said to her parents.  But at length
he seemed to find out that she would not be married till she had a
“trousseau” to her mind; and then he sent her a letter, which had
evidently accompanied a whole box full of finery, and in which he
requested that she might be dressed in everything her heart desired.
This was the first letter, ticketed in a frail, delicate hand, “From my
dearest John.”  Shortly afterwards they were married, I suppose, from
the intermission in their correspondence.

“We must burn them, I think,” said Miss Matty, looking doubtfully at me.
“No one will care for them when I am gone.”  And one by one she dropped
them into the middle of the fire, watching each blaze up, die out, and
rise away, in faint, white, ghostly semblance, up the chimney, before
she gave another to the same fate.  The room was light enough now; but
I, like her, was fascinated into watching the destruction of those
letters, into which the honest warmth of a manly heart had been poured
forth.

The next letter, likewise docketed by Miss Jenkyns, was endorsed,
“Letter of pious congratulation and exhortation from my venerable
grandfather to my beloved mother, on occasion of my own birth.  Also
some practical remarks on the desirability of keeping warm the
extremities of infants, from my excellent grandmother.”

The first part was, indeed, a severe and forcible picture of the
responsibilities of mothers, and a warning against the evils that were
in the world, and lying in ghastly wait for the little baby of two days
old. His wife did not write, said the old gentleman, because he had
forbidden it, she being indisposed with a sprained ankle, which (he
said) quite incapacitated her from holding a pen.  However, at the foot
of the page was a small “T.O.,” and on turning it over, sure enough,
there was a letter to “my dear, dearest Molly,” begging her, when she
left her room, whatever she did, to go _up_ stairs before going _down_:
and telling her to wrap her baby’s feet up in flannel, and keep it warm
by the fire, although it was summer, for babies were so tender.

It was pretty to see from the letters, which were evidently exchanged
with some frequency between the young mother and the grandmother, how
the girlish vanity was being weeded out of her heart by love for her
baby. The white “Paduasoy” figured again in the letters, with almost as
much vigour as before.  In one, it was being made into a christening
cloak for the baby.  It decked it when it went with its parents to
spend a day or two at Arley Hall.  It added to its charms, when it was
“the prettiest little baby that ever was seen.  Dear mother, I wish you
could see her! Without any pershality, I do think she will grow up a
regular bewty!”  I thought of Miss Jenkyns, grey, withered, and
wrinkled, and I wondered if her mother had known her in the courts of
heaven: and then I knew that she had, and that they stood there in
angelic guise.

There was a great gap before any of the rector’s letters appeared.  And
then his wife had changed her mode of her endorsement.  It was no longer
from, “My dearest John;” it was from “My Honoured Husband.”  The letters
were written on occasion of the publication of the same sermon which was
represented in the picture.  The preaching before “My Lord Judge,” and
the “publishing by request,” was evidently the culminating point—the
event of his life.  It had been necessary for him to go up to London to
superintend it through the press.  Many friends had to be called upon
and consulted before he could decide on any printer fit for so onerous a
task; and at length it was arranged that J. and J. Rivingtons were to
have the honourable responsibility.  The worthy rector seemed to be
strung up by the occasion to a high literary pitch, for he could hardly
write a letter to his wife without cropping out into Latin.  I remember
the end of one of his letters ran thus: “I shall ever hold the virtuous
qualities of my Molly in remembrance, _dum memor ipse mei_, _dum
spiritus regit artus_,” which, considering that the English of his
correspondent was sometimes at fault in grammar, and often in spelling,
might be taken as a proof of how much he “idealised his Molly;” and, as
Miss Jenkyns used to say, “People talk a great deal about idealising
now-a-days, whatever that may mean.”  But this was nothing to a fit of
writing classical poetry which soon seized him, in which his Molly
figured away as “Maria.”  The letter containing the _carmen_ was
endorsed by her, “Hebrew verses sent me by my honoured husband.  I thowt
to have had a letter about killing the pig, but must wait.  Mem., to
send the poetry to Sir Peter Arley, as my husband desires.”  And in a
post-scriptum note in his handwriting it was stated that the Ode had
appeared in the _Gentleman’s Magazine_, December 1782.

Her letters back to her husband (treasured as fondly by him as if they
had been _M. T. Ciceronis Epistolæ_) were more satisfactory to an absent
husband and father than his could ever have been to her.  She told him
how Deborah sewed her seam very neatly every day, and read to her in the
books he had set her; how she was a very “forrard,” good child, but
would ask questions her mother could not answer, but how she did not let
herself down by saying she did not know, but took to stirring the fire,
or sending the “forrard” child on an errand.  Matty was now the mother’s
darling, and promised (like her sister at her age), to be a great
beauty. I was reading this aloud to Miss Matty, who smiled and sighed a
little at the hope, so fondly expressed, that “little Matty might not be
vain, even if she were a bewty.”

“I had very pretty hair, my dear,” said Miss Matilda; “and not a bad
mouth.”  And I saw her soon afterwards adjust her cap and draw herself
up.

But to return to Mrs Jenkyns’s letters.  She told her husband about the
poor in the parish; what homely domestic medicines she had administered;
what kitchen physic she had sent.  She had evidently held his
displeasure as a rod in pickle over the heads of all the ne’er-do-wells.
 She asked for his directions about the cows and pigs; and did not
always obtain them, as I have shown before.

The kind old grandmother was dead when a little boy was born, soon after
the publication of the sermon; but there was another letter of
exhortation from the grandfather, more stringent and admonitory than
ever, now that there was a boy to be guarded from the snares of the
world.  He described all the various sins into which men might fall,
until I wondered how any man ever came to a natural death.  The gallows
seemed as if it must have been the termination of the lives of most of
the grandfather’s friends and acquaintance; and I was not surprised at
the way in which he spoke of this life being “a vale of tears.”

It seemed curious that I should never have heard of this brother before;
but I concluded that he had died young, or else surely his name would
have been alluded to by his sisters.

By-and-by we came to packets of Miss Jenkyns’s letters.  These Miss
Matty did regret to burn.  She said all the others had been only
interesting to those who loved the writers, and that it seemed as if it
would have hurt her to allow them to fall into the hands of strangers,
who had not known her dear mother, and how good she was, although she
did not always spell, quite in the modern fashion; but Deborah’s letters
were so very superior! Any one might profit by reading them.  It was a
long time since she had read Mrs Chapone, but she knew she used to think
that Deborah could have said the same things quite as well; and as for
Mrs Carter! people thought a deal of her letters, just because she had
written “Epictetus,” but she was quite sure Deborah would never have
made use of such a common expression as “I canna be fashed!”

     [Picture: I made use of the time to think of many other things]

Miss Matty did grudge burning these letters, it was evident.  She would
not let them be carelessly passed over with any quiet reading, and
skipping, to myself.  She took them from me, and even lighted the second
candle in order to read them aloud with a proper emphasis, and without
stumbling over the big words.  Oh dear! how I wanted facts instead of
reflections, before those letters were concluded!  They lasted us two
nights; and I won’t deny that I made use of the time to think of many
other things, and yet I was always at my post at the end of each
sentence.

The rector’s letters, and those of his wife and mother-in-law, had all
been tolerably short and pithy, written in a straight hand, with the
lines very close together.  Sometimes the whole letter was contained on
a mere scrap of paper.  The paper was very yellow, and the ink very
brown; some of the sheets were (as Miss Matty made me observe) the old
original post, with the stamp in the corner representing a post-boy
riding for life and twanging his horn.  The letters of Mrs Jenkyns and
her mother were fastened with a great round red wafer; for it was before
Miss Edgeworth’s “patronage” had banished wafers from polite society.
It was evident, from the tenor of what was said, that franks were in
great request, and were even used as a means of paying debts by needy
members of Parliament.  The rector sealed his epistles with an immense
coat of arms, and showed by the care with which he had performed this
ceremony that he expected they should be cut open, not broken by any
thoughtless or impatient hand.  Now, Miss Jenkyns’s letters were of a
later date in form and writing.  She wrote on the square sheet which we
have learned to call old-fashioned.  Her hand was admirably calculated,
together with her use of many-syllabled words, to fill up a sheet, and
then came the pride and delight of crossing.  Poor Miss Matty got sadly
puzzled with this, for the words gathered size like snowballs, and
towards the end of her letter Miss Jenkyns used to become quite
sesquipedalian.  In one to her father, slightly theological and
controversial in its tone, she had spoken of Herod, Tetrarch of Idumea.
Miss Matty read it “Herod Petrarch of Etruria,” and was just as well
pleased as if she had been right.

I can’t quite remember the date, but I think it was in 1805 that Miss
Jenkyns wrote the longest series of letters—on occasion of her absence
on a visit to some friends near Newcastle-upon-Tyne.  These friends were
intimate with the commandant of the garrison there, and heard from him
of all the preparations that were being made to repel the invasion of
Buonaparte, which some people imagined might take place at the mouth of
the Tyne.  Miss Jenkyns was evidently very much alarmed; and the first
part of her letters was often written in pretty intelligible English,
conveying particulars of the preparations which were made in the family
with whom she was residing against the dreaded event; the bundles of
clothes that were packed up ready for a flight to Alston Moor (a wild
hilly piece of ground between Northumberland and Cumberland); the signal
that was to be given for this flight, and for the simultaneous turning
out of the volunteers under arms—which said signal was to consist (if I
remember rightly) in ringing the church bells in a particular and
ominous manner.  One day, when Miss Jenkyns and her hosts were at a
dinner-party in Newcastle, this warning summons was actually given (not
a very wise proceeding, if there be any truth in the moral attached to
the fable of the Boy and the Wolf; but so it was), and Miss Jenkyns,
hardly recovered from her fright, wrote the next day to describe the
sound, the breathless shock, the hurry and alarm; and then, taking
breath, she added, “How trivial, my dear father, do all our
apprehensions of the last evening appear, at the present moment, to calm
and enquiring minds!”  And here Miss Matty broke in with—

“But, indeed, my dear, they were not at all trivial or trifling at the
time.  I know I used to wake up in the night many a time and think I
heard the tramp of the French entering Cranford.  Many people talked of
hiding themselves in the salt mines—and meat would have kept capitally
down there, only perhaps we should have been thirsty.  And my father
preached a whole set of sermons on the occasion; one set in the
mornings, all about David and Goliath, to spirit up the people to
fighting with spades or bricks, if need were; and the other set in the
afternoons, proving that Napoleon (that was another name for Bony, as we
used to call him) was all the same as an Apollyon and Abaddon.  I
remember my father rather thought he should be asked to print this last
set; but the parish had, perhaps, had enough of them with hearing.”

Peter Marmaduke Arley Jenkyns (“poor Peter!” as Miss Matty began to call
him) was at school at Shrewsbury by this time.  The rector took up his
pen, and rubbed up his Latin once more, to correspond with his boy.  It
was very clear that the lad’s were what are called show letters.  They
were of a highly mental description, giving an account of his studies,
and his intellectual hopes of various kinds, with an occasional
quotation from the classics; but, now and then, the animal nature broke
out in such a little sentence as this, evidently written in a trembling
hurry, after the letter had been inspected: “Mother dear, do send me a
cake, and put plenty of citron in.”  The “mother dear” probably answered
her boy in the form of cakes and “goody,” for there were none of her
letters among this set; but a whole collection of the rector’s, to whom
the Latin in his boy’s letters was like a trumpet to the old war-horse.
I do not know much about Latin, certainly, and it is, perhaps, an
ornamental language, but not very useful, I think—at least to judge from
the bits I remember out of the rector’s letters.  One was, “You have not
got that town in your map of Ireland; but _Bonus Bernardus non videt
omnia_, as the Proverbia say.”  Presently it became very evident that
“poor Peter” got himself into many scrapes.  There were letters of
stilted penitence to his father, for some wrong-doing; and among them
all was a badly-written, badly-sealed, badly-directed, blotted note:—“My
dear, dear, dear, dearest mother, I will be a better boy; I will,
indeed; but don’t, please, be ill for me; I am not worth it; but I will
be good, darling mother.”

Miss Matty could not speak for crying, after she had read this note.
She gave it to me in silence, and then got up and took it to her sacred
recesses in her own room, for fear, by any chance, it might get burnt.
“Poor Peter!” she said; “he was always in scrapes; he was too easy.
They led him wrong, and then left him in the lurch.  But he was too fond
of mischief.  He could never resist a joke.  Poor Peter!”




CHAPTER VI.
POOR PETER


POOR Peter’s career lay before him rather pleasantly mapped out by kind
friends, but _Bonus Bernardus non videt omnia_, in this map too.  He was
to win honours at the Shrewsbury School, and carry them thick to
Cambridge, and after that, a living awaited him, the gift of his
godfather, Sir Peter Arley.  Poor Peter! his lot in life was very
different to what his friends had hoped and planned.  Miss Matty told me
all about it, and I think it was a relief when she had done so.

He was the darling of his mother, who seemed to dote on all her
children, though she was, perhaps, a little afraid of Deborah’s superior
acquirements.  Deborah was the favourite of her father, and when Peter
disappointed him, she became his pride.  The sole honour Peter brought
away from Shrewsbury was the reputation of being the best good fellow
that ever was, and of being the captain of the school in the art of
practical joking.  His father was disappointed, but set about remedying
the matter in a manly way.  He could not afford to send Peter to read
with any tutor, but he could read with him himself; and Miss Matty told
me much of the awful preparations in the way of dictionaries and
lexicons that were made in her father’s study the morning Peter began.

“My poor mother!” said she.  “I remember how she used to stand in the
hall, just near enough the study-door, to catch the tone of my father’s
voice.  I could tell in a moment if all was going right, by her face.
And it did go right for a long time.”

“What went wrong at last?” said I.  “That tiresome Latin, I dare say.”

“No! it was not the Latin.  Peter was in high favour with my father, for
he worked up well for him.  But he seemed to think that the Cranford
people might be joked about, and made fun of, and they did not like it;
nobody does.  He was always hoaxing them; ‘hoaxing’ is not a pretty
word, my dear, and I hope you won’t tell your father I used it, for I
should not like him to think that I was not choice in my language, after
living with such a woman as Deborah.  And be sure you never use it
yourself.  I don’t know how it slipped out of my mouth, except it was
that I was thinking of poor Peter and it was always his expression.  But
he was a very gentlemanly boy in many things.  He was like dear Captain
Brown in always being ready to help any old person or a child.  Still,
he did like joking and making fun; and he seemed to think the old ladies
in Cranford would believe anything.  There were many old ladies living
here then; we are principally ladies now, I know, but we are not so old
as the ladies used to be when I was a girl.  I could laugh to think of
some of Peter’s jokes.  No, my dear, I won’t tell you of them, because
they might not shock you as they ought to do, and they were very
shocking.  He even took in my father once, by dressing himself up as a
lady that was passing through the town and wished to see the Rector of
Cranford, ‘who had published that admirable Assize Sermon.’  Peter said
he was awfully frightened himself when he saw how my father took it all
in, and even offered to copy out all his Napoleon Buonaparte sermons for
her—him, I mean—no, her, for Peter was a lady then.  He told me he was
more terrified than he ever was before, all the time my father was
speaking. He did not think my father would have believed him; and yet if
he had not, it would have been a sad thing for Peter.  As it was, he was
none so glad of it, for my father kept him hard at work copying out all
those twelve Buonaparte sermons for the lady—that was for Peter himself,
you know.  He was the lady.  And once when he wanted to go fishing,
Peter said, ‘Confound the woman!’—very bad language, my dear, but Peter
was not always so guarded as he should have been; my father was so angry
with him, it nearly frightened me out of my wits: and yet I could hardly
keep from laughing at the little curtseys Peter kept making, quite
slyly, whenever my father spoke of the lady’s excellent taste and sound
discrimination.”

                      [Picture: Confound the woman]

“Did Miss Jenkyns know of these tricks?” said I.

“Oh, no!  Deborah would have been too much shocked.  No, no one knew but
me.  I wish I had always known of Peter’s plans; but sometimes he did
not tell me.  He used to say the old ladies in the town wanted something
to talk about; but I don’t think they did.  They had the _St James’s
Chronicle_ three times a week, just as we have now, and we have plenty
to say; and I remember the clacking noise there always was when some of
the ladies got together.  But, probably, schoolboys talk more than
ladies. At last there was a terrible, sad thing happened.”  Miss Matty
got up, went to the door, and opened it; no one was there.  She rang the
bell for Martha, and when Martha came, her mistress told her to go for
eggs to a farm at the other end of the town.

“I will lock the door after you, Martha.  You are not afraid to go, are
you?”

“No, ma’am, not at all; Jem Hearn will be only too proud to go with me.”

Miss Matty drew herself up, and as soon as we were alone, she wished
that Martha had more maidenly reserve.

“We’ll put out the candle, my dear.  We can talk just as well by
firelight, you know.  There!  Well, you see, Deborah had gone from home
for a fortnight or so; it was a very still, quiet day, I remember,
overhead; and the lilacs were all in flower, so I suppose it was spring.
My father had gone out to see some sick people in the parish; I
recollect seeing him leave the house with his wig and shovel-hat and
cane.  What possessed our poor Peter I don’t know; he had the sweetest
temper, and yet he always seemed to like to plague Deborah.  She never
laughed at his jokes, and thought him ungenteel, and not careful enough
about improving his mind; and that vexed him.

“Well! he went to her room, it seems, and dressed himself in her old
gown, and shawl, and bonnet; just the things she used to wear in
Cranford, and was known by everywhere; and he made the pillow into a
little—you are sure you locked the door, my dear, for I should not like
anyone to hear—into—into a little baby, with white long clothes.  It was
only, as he told me afterwards, to make something to talk about in the
town; he never thought of it as affecting Deborah.  And he went and
walked up and down in the Filbert walk—just half-hidden by the rails,
and half-seen; and he cuddled his pillow, just like a baby, and talked
to it all the nonsense people do.  Oh dear! and my father came stepping
stately up the street, as he always did; and what should he see but a
little black crowd of people—I daresay as many as twenty—all peeping
through his garden rails.  So he thought, at first, they were only
looking at a new rhododendron that was in full bloom, and that he was
very proud of; and he walked slower, that they might have more time to
admire.  And he wondered if he could make out a sermon from the
occasion, and thought, perhaps, there was some relation between the
rhododendrons and the lilies of the field.  My poor father!  When he
came nearer, he began to wonder that they did not see him; but their
heads were all so close together, peeping and peeping!  My father was
amongst them, meaning, he said, to ask them to walk into the garden with
him, and admire the beautiful vegetable production, when—oh, my dear, I
tremble to think of it—he looked through the rails himself, and saw—I
don’t know what he thought he saw, but old Clare told me his face went
quite grey-white with anger, and his eyes blazed out under his frowning
black brows; and he spoke out—oh, so terribly!—and bade them all stop
where they were—not one of them to go, not one of them to stir a step;
and, swift as light, he was in at the garden door, and down the Filbert
walk, and seized hold of poor Peter, and tore his clothes off his
back—bonnet, shawl, gown, and all—and threw the pillow among the people
over the railings: and then he was very, very angry indeed, and before
all the people he lifted up his cane and flogged Peter!

“My dear, that boy’s trick, on that sunny day, when all seemed going
straight and well, broke my mother’s heart, and changed my father for
life.  It did, indeed.  Old Clare said, Peter looked as white as my
father; and stood as still as a statue to be flogged; and my father
struck hard!  When my father stopped to take breath, Peter said, ‘Have
you done enough, sir?’ quite hoarsely, and still standing quite quiet.
I don’t know what my father said—or if he said anything.  But old Clare
said, Peter turned to where the people outside the railing were, and
made them a low bow, as grand and as grave as any gentleman; and then
walked slowly into the house.  I was in the store-room helping my mother
to make cowslip wine.  I cannot abide the wine now, nor the scent of the
flowers; they turn me sick and faint, as they did that day, when Peter
came in, looking as haughty as any man—indeed, looking like a man, not
like a boy. ‘Mother!’ he said, ‘I am come to say, God bless you for
ever.’  I saw his lips quiver as he spoke; and I think he durst not say
anything more loving, for the purpose that was in his heart.  She
looked at him rather frightened, and wondering, and asked him what was
to do.  He did not smile or speak, but put his arms round her and kissed
her as if he did not know how to leave off; and before she could speak
again, he was gone. We talked it over, and could not understand it, and
she bade me go and seek my father, and ask what it was all about.  I
found him walking up and down, looking very highly displeased.

“‘Tell your mother I have flogged Peter, and that he richly deserved
it.’

“I durst not ask any more questions.  When I told my mother, she sat
down, quite faint, for a minute.  I remember, a few days after, I saw
the poor, withered cowslip flowers thrown out to the leaf heap, to decay
and die there.  There was no making of cowslip wine that year at the
rectory—nor, indeed, ever after.

“Presently my mother went to my father.  I know I thought of Queen
Esther and King Ahasuerus; for my mother was very pretty and
delicate-looking, and my father looked as terrible as King Ahasuerus.
Some time after they came out together; and then my mother told me what
had happened, and that she was going up to Peter’s room at my father’s
desire—though she was not to tell Peter this—to talk the matter over
with him.  But no Peter was there.  We looked over the house; no Peter
was there!  Even my father, who had not liked to join in the search at
first, helped us before long. The rectory was a very old house—steps up
into a room, steps down into a room, all through.  At first, my mother
went calling low and soft, as if to reassure the poor boy, ‘Peter!
Peter, dear! it’s only me;’ but, by-and-by, as the servants came back
from the errands my father had sent them, in different directions, to
find where Peter was—as we found he was not in the garden, nor the
hayloft, nor anywhere about—my mother’s cry grew louder and wilder,
‘Peter!  Peter, my darling! where are you?’ for then she felt and
understood that that long kiss meant some sad kind of ‘good-bye.’  The
afternoon went on—my mother never resting, but seeking again and again
in every possible place that had been looked into twenty times before,
nay, that she had looked into over and over again herself. My father sat
with his head in his hands, not speaking except when his messengers came
in, bringing no tidings; then he lifted up his face, so strong and sad,
and told them to go again in some new direction.  My mother kept passing
from room to room, in and out of the house, moving noiselessly, but
never ceasing.  Neither she nor my father durst leave the house, which
was the meeting-place for all the messengers.  At last (and it was
nearly dark), my father rose up.  He took hold of my mother’s arm as she
came with wild, sad pace through one door, and quickly towards another.
She started at the touch of his hand, for she had forgotten all in the
world but Peter.

“‘Molly!’ said he, ‘I did not think all this would happen.’  He looked
into her face for comfort—her poor face all wild and white; for neither
she nor my father had dared to acknowledge—much less act upon—the terror
that was in their hearts, lest Peter should have made away with himself.
My father saw no conscious look in his wife’s hot, dreary eyes, and he
missed the sympathy that she had always been ready to give him—strong
man as he was, and at the dumb despair in her face his tears began to
flow. But when she saw this, a gentle sorrow came over her countenance,
and she said, ‘Dearest John! don’t cry; come with me, and we’ll find
him,’ almost as cheerfully as if she knew where he was.  And she took my
father’s great hand in her little soft one, and led him along, the tears
dropping as he walked on that same unceasing, weary walk, from room to
room, through house and garden.

“Oh, how I wished for Deborah!  I had no time for crying, for now all
seemed to depend on me.  I wrote for Deborah to come home.  I sent a
message privately to that same Mr Holbrook’s house—poor Mr Holbrook;—you
know who I mean.  I don’t mean I sent a message to him, but I sent one
that I could trust to know if Peter was at his house.  For at one time
Mr Holbrook was an occasional visitor at the rectory—you know he was
Miss Pole’s cousin—and he had been very kind to Peter, and taught him
how to fish—he was very kind to everybody, and I thought Peter might
have gone off there.  But Mr Holbrook was from home, and Peter had never
been seen. It was night now; but the doors were all wide open, and my
father and mother walked on and on; it was more than an hour since he
had joined her, and I don’t believe they had ever spoken all that time.
I was getting the parlour fire lighted, and one of the servants was
preparing tea, for I wanted them to have something to eat and drink and
warm them, when old Clare asked to speak to me.

“‘I have borrowed the nets from the weir, Miss Matty.  Shall we drag the
ponds to-night, or wait for the morning?’

“I remember staring in his face to gather his meaning; and when I did, I
laughed out loud.  The horror of that new thought—our bright, darling
Peter, cold, and stark, and dead!  I remember the ring of my own laugh
now.

“The next day Deborah was at home before I was myself again.  She would
not have been so weak as to give way as I had done; but my screams (my
horrible laughter had ended in crying) had roused my sweet dear mother,
whose poor wandering wits were called back and collected as soon as a
child needed her care.  She and Deborah sat by my bedside; I knew by the
looks of each that there had been no news of Peter—no awful, ghastly
news, which was what I most had dreaded in my dull state between
sleeping and waking.

“The same result of all the searching had brought something of the same
relief to my mother, to whom, I am sure, the thought that Peter might
even then be hanging dead in some of the familiar home places had caused
that never-ending walk of yesterday.  Her soft eyes never were the same
again after that; they had always a restless, craving look, as if
seeking for what they could not find.  Oh! it was an awful time; coming
down like a thunder-bolt on the still sunny day when the lilacs were all
in bloom.”

“Where was Mr Peter?” said I.

“He had made his way to Liverpool; and there was war then; and some of
the king’s ships lay off the mouth of the Mersey; and they were only too
glad to have a fine likely boy such as him (five foot nine he was), come
to offer himself.  The captain wrote to my father, and Peter wrote to my
mother.  Stay! those letters will be somewhere here.”

We lighted the candle, and found the captain’s letter and Peter’s too.
And we also found a little simple begging letter from Mrs Jenkyns to
Peter, addressed to him at the house of an old schoolfellow whither she
fancied he might have gone.  They had returned it unopened; and unopened
it had remained ever since, having been inadvertently put by among the
other letters of that time.  This is it:—

    “MY DEAREST PETER,—You did not think we should be so sorry as we
    are, I know, or you would never have gone away.  You are too good.
    Your father sits and sighs till my heart aches to hear him.  He
    cannot hold up his head for grief; and yet he only did what he
    thought was right.  Perhaps he has been too severe, and perhaps
    I have not been kind enough; but God knows how we love you, my
    dear only boy.  Don looks so sorry you are gone.  Come back, and
    make us happy, who love you so much.  I know you will come back.”

But Peter did not come back.  That spring day was the last time he ever
saw his mother’s face.  The writer of the letter—the last—the only
person who had ever seen what was written in it, was dead long ago; and
I, a stranger, not born at the time when this occurrence took place, was
the one to open it.

The captain’s letter summoned the father and mother to Liverpool
instantly, if they wished to see their boy; and, by some of the wild
chances of life, the captain’s letter had been detained somewhere,
somehow.

Miss Matty went on, “And it was racetime, and all the post-horses at
Cranford were gone to the races; but my father and mother set off in our
own gig—and oh! my dear, they were too late—the ship was gone!  And now
read Peter’s letter to my mother!”

It was full of love, and sorrow, and pride in his new profession, and a
sore sense of his disgrace in the eyes of the people at Cranford; but
ending with a passionate entreaty that she would come and see him before
he left the Mersey: “Mother; we may go into battle.  I hope we shall,
and lick those French: but I must see you again before that time.”

“And she was too late,” said Miss Matty; “too late!”

We sat in silence, pondering on the full meaning of those sad, sad
words. At length I asked Miss Matty to tell me how her mother bore it.

“Oh!” she said, “she was patience itself.  She had never been strong,
and this weakened her terribly.  My father used to sit looking at her:
far more sad than she was.  He seemed as if he could look at nothing
else when she was by; and he was so humble—so very gentle now.  He
would, perhaps, speak in his old way—laying down the law, as it were—and
then, in a minute or two, he would come round and put his hand on our
shoulders, and ask us in a low voice, if he had said anything to hurt
us. I did not wonder at his speaking so to Deborah, for she was so
clever; but I could not bear to hear him talking so to me.

“But, you see, he saw what we did not—that it was killing my mother.
Yes! killing her (put out the candle, my dear; I can talk better in the
dark), for she was but a frail woman, and ill-fitted to stand the fright
and shock she had gone through; and she would smile at him and comfort
him, not in words, but in her looks and tones, which were always
cheerful when he was there.  And she would speak of how she thought
Peter stood a good chance of being admiral very soon—he was so brave and
clever; and how she thought of seeing him in his navy uniform, and what
sort of hats admirals wore; and how much more fit he was to be a sailor
than a clergyman; and all in that way, just to make my father think she
was quite glad of what came of that unlucky morning’s work, and the
flogging which was always in his mind, as we all knew.  But oh, my dear!
the bitter, bitter crying she had when she was alone; and at last, as
she grew weaker, she could not keep her tears in when Deborah or me was
by, and would give us message after message for Peter (his ship had gone
to the Mediterranean, or somewhere down there, and then he was ordered
off to India, and there was no overland route then); but she still said
that no one knew where their death lay in wait, and that we were not to
think hers was near.  We did not think it, but we knew it, as we saw her
fading away.

“Well, my dear, it’s very foolish of me, I know, when in all likelihood
I am so near seeing her again.

“And only think, love! the very day after her death—for she did not live
quite a twelvemonth after Peter went away—the very day after—came a
parcel for her from India—from her poor boy.  It was a large, soft,
white Indian shawl, with just a little narrow border all round; just
what my mother would have liked.

“We thought it might rouse my father, for he had sat with her hand in
his all night long; so Deborah took it in to him, and Peter’s letter to
her, and all.  At first, he took no notice; and we tried to make a kind
of light careless talk about the shawl, opening it out and admiring it.
Then, suddenly, he got up, and spoke: ‘She shall be buried in it,’ he
said; ‘Peter shall have that comfort; and she would have liked it.’

“Well, perhaps it was not reasonable, but what could we do or say?  One
gives people in grief their own way.  He took it up and felt it: ‘It is
just such a shawl as she wished for when she was married, and her mother
did not give it her.  I did not know of it till after, or she should
have had it—she should; but she shall have it now.’

“My mother looked so lovely in her death!  She was always pretty, and
now she looked fair, and waxen, and young—younger than Deborah, as she
stood trembling and shivering by her.  We decked her in the long soft
folds; she lay smiling, as if pleased; and people came—all Cranford
came—to beg to see her, for they had loved her dearly, as well they
might; and the countrywomen brought posies; old Clare’s wife brought
some white violets and begged they might lie on her breast.

“Deborah said to me, the day of my mother’s funeral, that if she had a
hundred offers she never would marry and leave my father.  It was not
very likely she would have so many—I don’t know that she had one; but it
was not less to her credit to say so.  She was such a daughter to my
father as I think there never was before or since.  His eyes failed him,
and she read book after book, and wrote, and copied, and was always at
his service in any parish business.  She could do many more things than
my poor mother could; she even once wrote a letter to the bishop for my
father.  But he missed my mother sorely; the whole parish noticed it.
Not that he was less active; I think he was more so, and more patient in
helping every one.  I did all I could to set Deborah at liberty to be
with him; for I knew I was good for little, and that my best work in the
world was to do odd jobs quietly, and set others at liberty.  But my
father was a changed man.”

“Did Mr Peter ever come home?”

“Yes, once.  He came home a lieutenant; he did not get to be admiral.
And he and my father were such friends!  My father took him into every
house in the parish, he was so proud of him.  He never walked out
without Peter’s arm to lean upon.  Deborah used to smile (I don’t think
we ever laughed again after my mother’s death), and say she was quite
put in a corner.  Not but what my father always wanted her when there
was letter-writing or reading to be done, or anything to be settled.”

“And then?” said I, after a pause.

“Then Peter went to sea again; and, by-and-by, my father died, blessing
us both, and thanking Deborah for all she had been to him; and, of
course, our circumstances were changed; and, instead of living at the
rectory, and keeping three maids and a man, we had to come to this small
house, and be content with a servant-of-all-work; but, as Deborah used
to say, we have always lived genteelly, even if circumstances have
compelled us to simplicity.  Poor Deborah!”

“And Mr Peter?” asked I.

“Oh, there was some great war in India—I forget what they call it—and we
have never heard of Peter since then.  I believe he is dead myself; and
it sometimes fidgets me that we have never put on mourning for him.  And
then again, when I sit by myself, and all the house is still, I think I
hear his step coming up the street, and my heart begins to flutter and
beat; but the sound always goes past—and Peter never comes.

“That’s Martha back?  No!  _I’ll_ go, my dear; I can always find my way
in the dark, you know.  And a blow of fresh air at the door will do my
head good, and it’s rather got a trick of aching.”

So she pattered off.  I had lighted the candle, to give the room a
cheerful appearance against her return.

“Was it Martha?” asked I.

“Yes.  And I am rather uncomfortable, for I heard such a strange noise,
just as I was opening the door.”

“Where?” I asked, for her eyes were round with affright.

“In the street—just outside—it sounded like”—

“Talking?” I put in, as she hesitated a little.

“No! kissing”—




CHAPTER VII.
VISITING


ONE morning, as Miss Matty and I sat at our work—it was before twelve
o’clock, and Miss Matty had not changed the cap with yellow ribbons that
had been Miss Jenkyns’s best, and which Miss Matty was now wearing out
in private, putting on the one made in imitation of Mrs Jamieson’s at
all times when she expected to be seen—Martha came up, and asked if Miss
Betty Barker might speak to her mistress.  Miss Matty assented, and
quickly disappeared to change the yellow ribbons, while Miss Barker came
upstairs; but, as she had forgotten her spectacles, and was rather
flurried by the unusual time of the visit, I was not surprised to see
her return with one cap on the top of the other.  She was quite
unconscious of it herself, and looked at us, with bland satisfaction.
Nor do I think Miss Barker perceived it; for, putting aside the little
circumstance that she was not so young as she had been, she was very
much absorbed in her errand, which she delivered herself of with an
oppressive modesty that found vent in endless apologies.

Miss Betty Barker was the daughter of the old clerk at Cranford who had
officiated in Mr Jenkyns’s time.  She and her sister had had pretty good
situations as ladies’ maids, and had saved money enough to set up a
milliner’s shop, which had been patronised by the ladies in the
neighbourhood.  Lady Arley, for instance, would occasionally give Miss
Barkers the pattern of an old cap of hers, which they immediately copied
and circulated among the _élite_ of Cranford.  I say the _élite_, for
Miss Barkers had caught the trick of the place, and piqued themselves
upon their “aristocratic connection.”  They would not sell their caps
and ribbons to anyone without a pedigree.  Many a farmer’s wife or
daughter turned away huffed from Miss Barkers’ select millinery, and
went rather to the universal shop, where the profits of brown soap and
moist sugar enabled the proprietor to go straight to (Paris, he said,
until he found his customers too patriotic and John Bullish to wear what
the Mounseers wore) London, where, as he often told his customers, Queen
Adelaide had appeared, only the very week before, in a cap exactly like
the one he showed them, trimmed with yellow and blue ribbons, and had
been complimented by King William on the becoming nature of her
head-dress.

Miss Barkers, who confined themselves to truth, and did not approve of
miscellaneous customers, throve notwithstanding.  They were
self-denying, good people.  Many a time have I seen the eldest of them
(she that had been maid to Mrs Jamieson) carrying out some delicate mess
to a poor person.  They only aped their betters in having “nothing to
do” with the class immediately below theirs.  And when Miss Barker died,
their profits and income were found to be such that Miss Betty was
justified in shutting up shop and retiring from business.  She also (as
I think I have before said) set up her cow; a mark of respectability in
Cranford almost as decided as setting up a gig is among some people.
She dressed finer than any lady in Cranford; and we did not wonder at
it; for it was understood that she was wearing out all the bonnets and
caps and outrageous ribbons which had once formed her stock-in-trade.
It was five or six years since she had given up shop, so in any other
place than Cranford her dress might have been considered _passée_.

And now Miss Betty Barker had called to invite Miss Matty to tea at her
house on the following Tuesday.  She gave me also an impromptu
invitation, as I happened to be a visitor—though I could see she had a
little fear lest, since my father had gone to live in Drumble, he might
have engaged in that “horrid cotton trade,” and so dragged his family
down out of “aristocratic society.”  She prefaced this invitation with
so many apologies that she quite excited my curiosity.  “Her
presumption” was to be excused.  What had she been doing?  She seemed so
overpowered by it I could only think that she had been writing to Queen
Adelaide to ask for a receipt for washing lace; but the act which she so
characterised was only an invitation she had carried to her sister’s
former mistress, Mrs Jamieson.  “Her former occupation considered, could
Miss Matty excuse the liberty?”  Ah! thought I, she has found out that
double cap, and is going to rectify Miss Matty’s head-dress.  No! it was
simply to extend her invitation to Miss Matty and to me.  Miss Matty
bowed acceptance; and I wondered that, in the graceful action, she did
not feel the unusual weight and extraordinary height of her head-dress.
But I do not think she did, for she recovered her balance, and went on
talking to Miss Betty in a kind, condescending manner, very different
from the fidgety way she would have had if she had suspected how
singular her appearance was.  “Mrs Jamieson is coming, I think you
said?” asked Miss Matty.

“Yes.  Mrs Jamieson most kindly and condescendingly said she would be
happy to come.  One little stipulation she made, that she should bring
Carlo.  I told her that if I had a weakness, it was for dogs.”

“And Miss Pole?” questioned Miss Matty, who was thinking of her pool at
Preference, in which Carlo would not be available as a partner.

“I am going to ask Miss Pole.  Of course, I could not think of asking
her until I had asked you, madam—the rector’s daughter, madam.  Believe
me, I do not forget the situation my father held under yours.”

“And Mrs Forrester, of course?”

“And Mrs Forrester.  I thought, in fact, of going to her before I went
to Miss Pole.  Although her circumstances are changed, madam, she was
born at Tyrrell, and we can never forget her alliance to the Bigges, of
Bigelow Hall.”

Miss Matty cared much more for the little circumstance of her being a
very good card-player.

“Mrs Fitz-Adam—I suppose”—

“No, madam.  I must draw a line somewhere.  Mrs Jamieson would not, I
think, like to meet Mrs Fitz-Adam.  I have the greatest respect for Mrs
Fitz-Adam—but I cannot think her fit society for such ladies as Mrs
Jamieson and Miss Matilda Jenkyns.”

Miss Betty Barker bowed low to Miss Matty, and pursed up her mouth.  She
looked at me with sidelong dignity, as much as to say, although a
retired milliner, she was no democrat, and understood the difference of
ranks.

“May I beg you to come as near half-past six to my little dwelling, as
possible, Miss Matilda?  Mrs Jamieson dines at five, but has kindly
promised not to delay her visit beyond that time—half-past six.”  And
with a swimming curtsey Miss Betty Barker took her leave.

My prophetic soul foretold a visit that afternoon from Miss Pole, who
usually came to call on Miss Matilda after any event—or indeed in sight
of any event—to talk it over with her.

“Miss Betty told me it was to be a choice and select few,” said Miss
Pole, as she and Miss Matty compared notes.

“Yes, so she said.  Not even Mrs Fitz-Adam.”

Now Mrs Fitz-Adam was the widowed sister of the Cranford surgeon, whom I
have named before.  Their parents were respectable farmers, content with
their station.  The name of these good people was Hoggins.  Mr Hoggins
was the Cranford doctor now; we disliked the name and considered it
coarse; but, as Miss Jenkyns said, if he changed it to Piggins it would
not be much better.  We had hoped to discover a relationship between him
and that Marchioness of Exeter whose name was Molly Hoggins; but the
man, careless of his own interests, utterly ignored and denied any such
relationship, although, as dear Miss Jenkyns had said, he had a sister
called Mary, and the same Christian names were very apt to run in
families.

Soon after Miss Mary Hoggins married Mr Fitz-Adam, she disappeared from
the neighbourhood for many years.  She did not move in a sphere in
Cranford society sufficiently high to make any of us care to know what
Mr Fitz-Adam was.  He died and was gathered to his fathers without our
ever having thought about him at all.  And then Mrs Fitz-Adam reappeared
in Cranford (“as bold as a lion,” Miss Pole said), a well-to-do widow,
dressed in rustling black silk, so soon after her husband’s death that
poor Miss Jenkyns was justified in the remark she made, that “bombazine
would have shown a deeper sense of her loss.”

I remember the convocation of ladies who assembled to decide whether or
not Mrs Fitz-Adam should be called upon by the old blue-blooded
inhabitants of Cranford.  She had taken a large rambling house, which
had been usually considered to confer a patent of gentility upon its
tenant, because, once upon a time, seventy or eighty years before, the
spinster daughter of an earl had resided in it.  I am not sure if the
inhabiting this house was not also believed to convey some unusual power
of intellect; for the earl’s daughter, Lady Jane, had a sister, Lady
Anne, who had married a general officer in the time of the American war,
and this general officer had written one or two comedies, which were
still acted on the London boards, and which, when we saw them
advertised, made us all draw up, and feel that Drury Lane was paying a
very pretty compliment to Cranford.  Still, it was not at all a settled
thing that Mrs Fitz-Adam was to be visited, when dear Miss Jenkyns died;
and, with her, something of the clear knowledge of the strict code of
gentility went out too.  As Miss Pole observed, “As most of the ladies
of good family in Cranford were elderly spinsters, or widows without
children, if we did not relax a little, and become less exclusive,
by-and-by we should have no society at all.”

Mrs Forrester continued on the same side.

“She had always understood that Fitz meant something aristocratic; there
was Fitz-Roy—she thought that some of the King’s children had been
called Fitz-Roy; and there was Fitz-Clarence, now—they were the children
of dear good King William the Fourth.  Fitz-Adam!—it was a pretty name,
and she thought it very probably meant ‘Child of Adam.’  No one, who had
not some good blood in their veins, would dare to be called Fitz; there
was a deal in a name—she had had a cousin who spelt his name with two
little ffs—ffoulkes—and he always looked down upon capital letters and
said they belonged to lately-invented families.  She had been afraid he
would die a bachelor, he was so very choice.  When he met with a Mrs
ffarringdon, at a watering-place, he took to her immediately; and a very
pretty genteel woman she was—a widow, with a very good fortune; and ‘my
cousin,’ Mr ffoulkes, married her; and it was all owing to her two
little ffs.”

Mrs Fitz-Adam did not stand a chance of meeting with a Mr Fitz-anything
in Cranford, so that could not have been her motive for settling there.
Miss Matty thought it might have been the hope of being admitted into
the society of the place, which would certainly be a very agreeable rise
for _ci-devant_ Miss Hoggins; and if this had been her hope it would be
cruel to disappoint her.

So everybody called upon Mrs Fitz-Adam—everybody but Mrs Jamieson, who
used to show how honourable she was by never seeing Mrs Fitz-Adam when
they met at the Cranford parties.  There would be only eight or ten
ladies in the room, and Mrs Fitz-Adam was the largest of all, and she
invariably used to stand up when Mrs Jamieson came in, and curtsey very
low to her whenever she turned in her direction—so low, in fact, that I
think Mrs Jamieson must have looked at the wall above her, for she never
moved a muscle of her face, no more than if she had not seen her.  Still
Mrs Fitz-Adam persevered.

The spring evenings were getting bright and long when three or four
ladies in calashes met at Miss Barker’s door.  Do you know what a
calash is?  It is a covering worn over caps, not unlike the heads
fastened on old-fashioned gigs; but sometimes it is not quite so large.
This kind of head-gear always made an awful impression on the children
in Cranford; and now two or three left off their play in the quiet
sunny little street, and gathered in wondering silence round Miss Pole,
Miss Matty, and myself.  We were silent too, so that we could hear
loud, suppressed whispers inside Miss Barker’s house: “Wait, Peggy! wait
till I’ve run upstairs and washed my hands.  When I cough, open the
door; I’ll not be a minute.”

And, true enough it was not a minute before we heard a noise, between a
sneeze and a crow; on which the door flew open.  Behind it stood a
round-eyed maiden, all aghast at the honourable company of calashes, who
marched in without a word.  She recovered presence of mind enough to
usher us into a small room, which had been the shop, but was now
converted into a temporary dressing-room.  There we unpinned and shook
ourselves, and arranged our features before the glass into a sweet and
gracious company-face; and then, bowing backwards with “After you,
ma’am,” we allowed Mrs Forrester to take precedence up the narrow
staircase that led to Miss Barker’s drawing-room.  There she sat, as
stately and composed as though we had never heard that odd-sounding
cough, from which her throat must have been even then sore and rough.
Kind, gentle, shabbily-dressed Mrs Forrester was immediately conducted
to the second place of honour—a seat arranged something like Prince
Albert’s near the Queen’s—good, but not so good.  The place of
pre-eminence was, of course, reserved for the Honourable Mrs Jamieson,
who presently came panting up the stairs—Carlo rushing round her on her
progress, as if he meant to trip her up.

And now Miss Betty Barker was a proud and happy woman!  She stirred the
fire, and shut the door, and sat as near to it as she could, quite on
the edge of her chair.  When Peggy came in, tottering under the weight
of the tea-tray, I noticed that Miss Barker was sadly afraid lest Peggy
should not keep her distance sufficiently.  She and her mistress were on
very familiar terms in their every-day intercourse, and Peggy wanted now
to make several little confidences to her, which Miss Barker was on
thorns to hear, but which she thought it her duty, as a lady, to
repress.  So she turned away from all Peggy’s asides and signs; but she
made one or two very malapropos answers to what was said; and at last,
seized with a bright idea, she exclaimed, “Poor, sweet Carlo!  I’m
forgetting him. Come downstairs with me, poor ittie doggie, and it shall
have its tea, it shall!”

In a few minutes she returned, bland and benignant as before; but I
thought she had forgotten to give the “poor ittie doggie” anything to
eat, judging by the avidity with which he swallowed down chance pieces
of cake.  The tea-tray was abundantly loaded—I was pleased to see it, I
was so hungry; but I was afraid the ladies present might think it
vulgarly heaped up.  I know they would have done at their own houses;
but somehow the heaps disappeared here.  I saw Mrs Jamieson eating
seed-cake, slowly and considerately, as she did everything; and I was
rather surprised, for I knew she had told us, on the occasion of her
last party, that she never had it in her house, it reminded her so much
of scented soap.  She always gave us Savoy biscuits.  However, Mrs
Jamieson was kindly indulgent to Miss Barker’s want of knowledge of the
customs of high life; and, to spare her feelings, ate three large pieces
of seed-cake, with a placid, ruminating expression of countenance, not
unlike a cow’s.

After tea there was some little demur and difficulty.  We were six in
number; four could play at Preference, and for the other two there was
Cribbage.  But all, except myself (I was rather afraid of the Cranford
ladies at cards, for it was the most earnest and serious business they
ever engaged in), were anxious to be of the “pool.”  Even Miss Barker,
while declaring she did not know Spadille from Manille, was evidently
hankering to take a hand.  The dilemma was soon put an end to by a
singular kind of noise.  If a baron’s daughter-in-law could ever be
supposed to snore, I should have said Mrs Jamieson did so then; for,
overcome by the heat of the room, and inclined to doze by nature, the
temptation of that very comfortable arm-chair had been too much for her,
and Mrs Jamieson was nodding.  Once or twice she opened her eyes with an
effort, and calmly but unconsciously smiled upon us; but by-and-by, even
her benevolence was not equal to this exertion, and she was sound
asleep.

 [Picture: The temptation of the comfortable arm-chair had been too much
                                 for her]

“It is very gratifying to me,” whispered Miss Barker at the card-table
to her three opponents, whom, notwithstanding her ignorance of the game,
she was “basting” most unmercifully—“very gratifying indeed, to see how
completely Mrs Jamieson feels at home in my poor little dwelling; she
could not have paid me a greater compliment.”

Miss Barker provided me with some literature in the shape of three or
four handsomely-bound fashion-books ten or twelve years old, observing,
as she put a little table and a candle for my especial benefit, that she
knew young people liked to look at pictures.  Carlo lay and snorted, and
started at his mistress’s feet.  He, too, was quite at home.

The card-table was an animated scene to watch; four ladies’ heads, with
niddle-noddling caps, all nearly meeting over the middle of the table in
their eagerness to whisper quick enough and loud enough: and every now
and then came Miss Barker’s “Hush, ladies! if you please, hush!  Mrs
Jamieson is asleep.”

It was very difficult to steer clear between Mrs Forrester’s deafness
and Mrs Jamieson’s sleepiness.  But Miss Barker managed her arduous task
well.  She repeated the whisper to Mrs Forrester, distorting her face
considerably, in order to show, by the motions of her lips, what was
said; and then she smiled kindly all round at us, and murmured to
herself, “Very gratifying, indeed; I wish my poor sister had been alive
to see this day.”

Presently the door was thrown wide open; Carlo started to his feet, with
a loud snapping bark, and Mrs Jamieson awoke: or, perhaps, she had not
been asleep—as she said almost directly, the room had been so light she
had been glad to keep her eyes shut, but had been listening with great
interest to all our amusing and agreeable conversation.  Peggy came in
once more, red with importance.  Another tray!  “Oh, gentility!” thought
I, “can you endure this last shock?”  For Miss Barker had ordered (nay,
I doubt not, prepared, although she did say, “Why, Peggy, what have you
brought us?” and looked pleasantly surprised at the unexpected pleasure)
all sorts of good things for supper—scalloped oysters, potted lobsters,
jelly, a dish called “little Cupids” (which was in great favour with the
Cranford ladies, although too expensive to be given, except on solemn
and state occasions—macaroons sopped in brandy, I should have called it,
if I had not known its more refined and classical name).  In short, we
were evidently to be feasted with all that was sweetest and best; and
we thought it better to submit graciously, even at the cost of our
gentility—which never ate suppers in general, but which, like most
non-supper-eaters, was particularly hungry on all special occasions.

Miss Barker, in her former sphere, had, I daresay, been made acquainted
with the beverage they call cherry-brandy.  We none of us had ever seen
such a thing, and rather shrank back when she proffered it us—“just a
little, leetle glass, ladies; after the oysters and lobsters, you know.
Shell-fish are sometimes thought not very wholesome.”  We all shook our
heads like female mandarins; but, at last, Mrs Jamieson suffered herself
to be persuaded, and we followed her lead.  It was not exactly
unpalatable, though so hot and so strong that we thought ourselves bound
to give evidence that we were not accustomed to such things by coughing
terribly—almost as strangely as Miss Barker had done, before we were
admitted by Peggy.

“It’s very strong,” said Miss Pole, as she put down her empty glass; “I
do believe there’s spirit in it.”

“Only a little drop—just necessary to make it keep,” said Miss Barker.
“You know we put brandy-pepper over our preserves to make them keep.  I
often feel tipsy myself from eating damson tart.”

I question whether damson tart would have opened Mrs Jamieson’s heart as
the cherry-brandy did; but she told us of a coming event, respecting
which she had been quite silent till that moment.

“My sister-in-law, Lady Glenmire, is coming to stay with me.”

There was a chorus of “Indeed!” and then a pause.  Each one rapidly
reviewed her wardrobe, as to its fitness to appear in the presence of a
baron’s widow; for, of course, a series of small festivals were always
held in Cranford on the arrival of a visitor at any of our friends’
houses.  We felt very pleasantly excited on the present occasion.

Not long after this the maids and the lanterns were announced.  Mrs
Jamieson had the sedan-chair, which had squeezed itself into Miss
Barker’s narrow lobby with some difficulty, and most literally “stopped
the way.”  It required some skilful manoeuvring on the part of the old
chairmen (shoemakers by day, but when summoned to carry the sedan
dressed up in a strange old livery—long great-coats, with small capes,
coeval with the sedan, and similar to the dress of the class in
Hogarth’s pictures) to edge, and back, and try at it again, and finally
to succeed in carrying their burden out of Miss Barker’s front door.
Then we heard their quick pit-a-pat along the quiet little street as we
put on our calashes and pinned up our gowns; Miss Barker hovering about
us with offers of help, which, if she had not remembered her former
occupation, and wished us to forget it, would have been much more
pressing.




CHAPTER VIII.
“YOUR LADYSHIP”


EARLY the next morning—directly after twelve—Miss Pole made her
appearance at Miss Matty’s.  Some very trifling piece of business was
alleged as a reason for the call; but there was evidently something
behind.  At last out it came.

“By the way, you’ll think I’m strangely ignorant; but, do you really
know, I am puzzled how we ought to address Lady Glenmire.  Do you say,
‘Your Ladyship,’ where you would say ‘you’ to a common person?  I have
been puzzling all morning; and are we to say ‘My Lady,’ instead of
‘Ma’am?’  Now you knew Lady Arley—will you kindly tell me the most
correct way of speaking to the peerage?”

Poor Miss Matty! she took off her spectacles and she put them on
again—but how Lady Arley was addressed, she could not remember.

“It is so long ago,” she said.  “Dear! dear! how stupid I am!  I don’t
think I ever saw her more than twice.  I know we used to call Sir Peter,
‘Sir Peter’—but he came much oftener to see us than Lady Arley did.
Deborah would have known in a minute.  ‘My lady’—‘your ladyship.’  It
sounds very strange, and as if it was not natural.  I never thought of
it before; but, now you have named it, I am all in a puzzle.”

It was very certain Miss Pole would obtain no wise decision from Miss
Matty, who got more bewildered every moment, and more perplexed as to
etiquettes of address.

“Well, I really think,” said Miss Pole, “I had better just go and tell
Mrs Forrester about our little difficulty.  One sometimes grows nervous;
and yet one would not have Lady Glenmire think we were quite ignorant of
the etiquettes of high life in Cranford.”

“And will you just step in here, dear Miss Pole, as you come back,
please, and tell me what you decide upon?  Whatever you and Mrs
Forrester fix upon, will be quite right, I’m sure.  ‘Lady Arley,’ ‘Sir
Peter,’” said Miss Matty to herself, trying to recall the old forms of
words.

“Who is Lady Glenmire?” asked I.

“Oh, she’s the widow of Mr Jamieson—that’s Mrs Jamieson’s late husband,
you know—widow of his eldest brother.  Mrs Jamieson was a Miss Walker,
daughter of Governor Walker.  ‘Your ladyship.’  My dear, if they fix on
that way of speaking, you must just let me practice a little on you
first, for I shall feel so foolish and hot saying it the first time to
Lady Glenmire.”

It was really a relief to Miss Matty when Mrs Jamieson came on a very
unpolite errand.  I notice that apathetic people have more quiet
impertinence than others; and Mrs Jamieson came now to insinuate pretty
plainly that she did not particularly wish that the Cranford ladies
should call upon her sister-in-law.  I can hardly say how she made this
clear; for I grew very indignant and warm, while with slow deliberation
she was explaining her wishes to Miss Matty, who, a true lady herself,
could hardly understand the feeling which made Mrs Jamieson wish to
appear to her noble sister-in-law as if she only visited “county”
families.  Miss Matty remained puzzled and perplexed long after I had
found out the object of Mrs Jamieson’s visit.

When she did understand the drift of the honourable lady’s call, it was
pretty to see with what quiet dignity she received the intimation thus
uncourteously given.  She was not in the least hurt—she was of too
gentle a spirit for that; nor was she exactly conscious of disapproving
of Mrs Jamieson’s conduct; but there was something of this feeling in
her mind, I am sure, which made her pass from the subject to others in a
less flurried and more composed manner than usual.  Mrs Jamieson was,
indeed, the more flurried of the two, and I could see she was glad to
take her leave.

A little while afterwards Miss Pole returned, red and indignant.  “Well!
to be sure!  You’ve had Mrs Jamieson here, I find from Martha; and we
are not to call on Lady Glenmire.  Yes!  I met Mrs Jamieson, half-way
between here and Mrs Forrester’s, and she told me; she took me so by
surprise, I had nothing to say.  I wish I had thought of something very
sharp and sarcastic; I dare say I shall to-night.  And Lady Glenmire is
but the widow of a Scotch baron after all!  I went on to look at Mrs
Forrester’s Peerage, to see who this lady was, that is to be kept under
a glass case: widow of a Scotch peer—never sat in the House of Lords—and
as poor as Job, I dare say; and she—fifth daughter of some Mr Campbell
or other. You are the daughter of a rector, at any rate, and related to
the Arleys; and Sir Peter might have been Viscount Arley, every one
says.”

Miss Matty tried to soothe Miss Pole, but in vain.  That lady, usually
so kind and good-humoured, was now in a full flow of anger.

“And I went and ordered a cap this morning, to be quite ready,” said she
at last, letting out the secret which gave sting to Mrs Jamieson’s
intimation.  “Mrs Jamieson shall see if it is so easy to get me to make
fourth at a pool when she has none of her fine Scotch relations with
her!”

In coming out of church, the first Sunday on which Lady Glenmire
appeared in Cranford, we sedulously talked together, and turned our
backs on Mrs Jamieson and her guest.  If we might not call on her, we
would not even look at her, though we were dying with curiosity to know
what she was like.  We had the comfort of questioning Martha in the
afternoon.  Martha did not belong to a sphere of society whose
observation could be an implied compliment to Lady Glenmire, and Martha
had made good use of her eyes.

“Well, ma’am! is it the little lady with Mrs Jamieson, you mean?  I
thought you would like more to know how young Mrs Smith was dressed; her
being a bride.”  (Mrs Smith was the butcher’s wife).

Miss Pole said, “Good gracious me! as if we cared about a Mrs Smith;”
but was silent as Martha resumed her speech.

“The little lady in Mrs Jamieson’s pew had on, ma’am, rather an old
black silk, and a shepherd’s plaid cloak, ma’am, and very bright black
eyes she had, ma’am, and a pleasant, sharp face; not over young, ma’am,
but yet, I should guess, younger than Mrs Jamieson herself.  She looked
up and down the church, like a bird, and nipped up her petticoats, when
she came out, as quick and sharp as ever I see.  I’ll tell you what,
ma’am, she’s more like Mrs Deacon, at the ‘Coach and Horses,’ nor any
one.”

“Hush, Martha!” said Miss Matty, “that’s not respectful.”

“Isn’t it, ma’am?  I beg pardon, I’m sure; but Jem Hearn said so as
well. He said, she was just such a sharp, stirring sort of a body”—

“Lady,” said Miss Pole.

“Lady—as Mrs Deacon.”

Another Sunday passed away, and we still averted our eyes from Mrs
Jamieson and her guest, and made remarks to ourselves that we thought
were very severe—almost too much so.  Miss Matty was evidently uneasy at
our sarcastic manner of speaking.

Perhaps by this time Lady Glenmire had found out that Mrs Jamieson’s was
not the gayest, liveliest house in the world; perhaps Mrs Jamieson had
found out that most of the county families were in London, and that
those who remained in the country were not so alive as they might have
been to the circumstance of Lady Glenmire being in their neighbourhood.
Great events spring out of small causes; so I will not pretend to say
what induced Mrs Jamieson to alter her determination of excluding the
Cranford ladies, and send notes of invitation all round for a small
party on the following Tuesday.  Mr Mulliner himself brought them round.
 He _would_ always ignore the fact of there being a back door to any
house, and gave a louder rat-tat than his mistress, Mrs Jamieson.  He
had three little notes, which he carried in a large basket, in order to
impress his mistress with an idea of their great weight, though they
might easily have gone into his waistcoat pocket.

Miss Matty and I quietly decided that we would have a previous
engagement at home: it was the evening on which Miss Matty usually made
candle-lighters of all the notes and letters of the week; for on Mondays
her accounts were always made straight—not a penny owing from the week
before; so, by a natural arrangement, making candle-lighters fell upon a
Tuesday evening, and gave us a legitimate excuse for declining Mrs
Jamieson’s invitation.  But before our answer was written, in came Miss
Pole, with an open note in her hand.

“So!” she said.  “Ah!  I see you have got your note, too.  Better late
than never.  I could have told my Lady Glenmire she would be glad enough
of our society before a fortnight was over.”

“Yes,” said Miss Matty, “we’re asked for Tuesday evening.  And perhaps
you would just kindly bring your work across and drink tea with us that
night.  It is my usual regular time for looking over the last week’s
bills, and notes, and letters, and making candle-lighters of them; but
that does not seem quite reason enough for saying I have a previous
engagement at home, though I meant to make it do.  Now, if you would
come, my conscience would be quite at ease, and luckily the note is not
written yet.”

I saw Miss Pole’s countenance change while Miss Matty was speaking.

“Don’t you mean to go then?” asked she.

“Oh, no!” said, Miss Matty quietly.  “You don’t either, I suppose?”

“I don’t know,” replied Miss Pole.  “Yes, I think I do,” said she,
rather briskly; and on seeing Miss Matty look surprised, she added, “You
see, one would not like Mrs Jamieson to think that anything she could
do, or say, was of consequence enough to give offence; it would be a
kind of letting down of ourselves, that I, for one, should not like.  It
would be too flattering to Mrs Jamieson if we allowed her to suppose
that what she had said affected us a week, nay ten days afterwards.”

“Well!  I suppose it is wrong to be hurt and annoyed so long about
anything; and, perhaps, after all, she did not mean to vex us.  But I
must say, I could not have brought myself to say the things Mrs Jamieson
did about our not calling.  I really don’t think I shall go.”

“Oh, come!  Miss Matty, you must go; you know our friend Mrs Jamieson is
much more phlegmatic than most people, and does not enter into the
little delicacies of feeling which you possess in so remarkable a
degree.”

“I thought you possessed them, too, that day Mrs Jamieson called to tell
us not to go,” said Miss Matty innocently.

But Miss Pole, in addition to her delicacies of feeling, possessed a
very smart cap, which she was anxious to show to an admiring world; and
so she seemed to forget all her angry words uttered not a fortnight
before, and to be ready to act on what she called the great Christian
principle of “Forgive and forget”; and she lectured dear Miss Matty so
long on this head that she absolutely ended by assuring her it was her
duty, as a deceased rector’s daughter, to buy a new cap and go to the
party at Mrs Jamieson’s.  So “we were most happy to accept,” instead of
“regretting that we were obliged to decline.”

                          [Picture: Mr Mulliner]

The expenditure on dress in Cranford was principally in that one article
referred to.  If the heads were buried in smart new caps, the ladies
were like ostriches, and cared not what became of their bodies.  Old
gowns, white and venerable collars, any number of brooches, up and down
and everywhere (some with dogs’ eyes painted in them; some that were
like small picture-frames with mausoleums and weeping-willows neatly
executed in hair inside; some, again, with miniatures of ladies and
gentlemen sweetly smiling out of a nest of stiff muslin), old brooches
for a permanent ornament, and new caps to suit the fashion of the
day—the ladies of Cranford always dressed with chaste elegance and
propriety, as Miss Barker once prettily expressed it.

And with three new caps, and a greater array of brooches than had ever
been seen together at one time since Cranford was a town, did Mrs
Forrester, and Miss Matty, and Miss Pole appear on that memorable
Tuesday evening.  I counted seven brooches myself on Miss Pole’s dress.
Two were fixed negligently in her cap (one was a butterfly made of
Scotch pebbles, which a vivid imagination might believe to be the real
insect); one fastened her net neckerchief; one her collar; one
ornamented the front of her gown, midway between her throat and waist;
and another adorned the point of her stomacher.  Where the seventh was I
have forgotten, but it was somewhere about her, I am sure.

But I am getting on too fast, in describing the dresses of the company.
I should first relate the gathering on the way to Mrs Jamieson’s.  That
lady lived in a large house just outside the town.  A road which had
known what it was to be a street ran right before the house, which
opened out upon it without any intervening garden or court.  Whatever
the sun was about, he never shone on the front of that house.  To be
sure, the living-rooms were at the back, looking on to a pleasant
garden; the front windows only belonged to kitchens and housekeepers’
rooms, and pantries, and in one of them Mr Mulliner was reported to sit.
 Indeed, looking askance, we often saw the back of a head covered with
hair powder, which also extended itself over his coat-collar down to his
very waist; and this imposing back was always engaged in reading the _St
James’s Chronicle_, opened wide, which, in some degree, accounted for
the length of time the said newspaper was in reaching us—equal
subscribers with Mrs Jamieson, though, in right of her honourableness,
she always had the reading of it first.  This very Tuesday, the delay in
forwarding the last number had been particularly aggravating; just when
both Miss Pole and Miss Matty, the former more especially, had been
wanting to see it, in order to coach up the Court news ready for the
evening’s interview with aristocracy.  Miss Pole told us she had
absolutely taken time by the forelock, and been dressed by five o’clock,
in order to be ready if the _St James’s Chronicle_ should come in at the
last moment—the very _St James’s Chronicle_ which the powdered head was
tranquilly and composedly reading as we passed the accustomed window
this evening.

“The impudence of the man!” said Miss Pole, in a low indignant whisper.
“I should like to ask him whether his mistress pays her quarter-share
for his exclusive use.”

We looked at her in admiration of the courage of her thought; for Mr
Mulliner was an object of great awe to all of us.  He seemed never to
have forgotten his condescension in coming to live at Cranford.  Miss
Jenkyns, at times, had stood forth as the undaunted champion of her sex,
and spoken to him on terms of equality; but even Miss Jenkyns could get
no higher.  In his pleasantest and most gracious moods he looked like a
sulky cockatoo.  He did not speak except in gruff monosyllables.  He
would wait in the hall when we begged him not to wait, and then look
deeply offended because we had kept him there, while, with trembling,
hasty hands we prepared ourselves for appearing in company.

Miss Pole ventured on a small joke as we went upstairs, intended, though
addressed to us, to afford Mr Mulliner some slight amusement.  We all
smiled, in order to seem as if we felt at our ease, and timidly looked
for Mr Mulliner’s sympathy.  Not a muscle of that wooden face had
relaxed; and we were grave in an instant.

Mrs Jamieson’s drawing-room was cheerful; the evening sun came streaming
into it, and the large square window was clustered round with flowers.
The furniture was white and gold; not the later style, Louis Quatorze, I
think they call it, all shells and twirls; no, Mrs Jamieson’s chairs and
tables had not a curve or bend about them.  The chair and table legs
diminished as they neared the ground, and were straight and square in
all their corners.  The chairs were all a-row against the walls, with
the exception of four or five which stood in a circle round the fire.
They were railed with white bars across the back and knobbed with gold;
neither the railings nor the knobs invited to ease.  There was a
japanned table devoted to literature, on which lay a Bible, a Peerage,
and a Prayer-Book.  There was another square Pembroke table dedicated to
the Fine Arts, on which were a kaleidoscope, conversation-cards,
puzzle-cards (tied together to an interminable length with faded pink
satin ribbon), and a box painted in fond imitation of the drawings which
decorate tea-chests.  Carlo lay on the worsted-worked rug, and
ungraciously barked at us as we entered.  Mrs Jamieson stood up, giving
us each a torpid smile of welcome, and looking helplessly beyond us at
Mr Mulliner, as if she hoped he would place us in chairs, for, if he did
not, she never could.  I suppose he thought we could find our way to the
circle round the fire, which reminded me of Stonehenge, I don’t know
why.  Lady Glenmire came to the rescue of our hostess, and, somehow or
other, we found ourselves for the first time placed agreeably, and not
formally, in Mrs Jamieson’s house.  Lady Glenmire, now we had time to
look at her, proved to be a bright little woman of middle age, who had
been very pretty in the days of her youth, and who was even yet very
pleasant-looking.  I saw Miss Pole appraising her dress in the first
five minutes, and I take her word when she said the next day—

“My dear! ten pounds would have purchased every stitch she had on—lace
and all.”

It was pleasant to suspect that a peeress could be poor, and partly
reconciled us to the fact that her husband had never sat in the House of
Lords; which, when we first heard of it, seemed a kind of swindling us
out of our prospects on false pretences; a sort of “A Lord and No Lord”
business.

We were all very silent at first.  We were thinking what we could talk
about, that should be high enough to interest My Lady.  There had been a
rise in the price of sugar, which, as preserving-time was near, was a
piece of intelligence to all our house-keeping hearts, and would have
been the natural topic if Lady Glenmire had not been by.  But we were
not sure if the peerage ate preserves—much less knew how they were made.
 At last, Miss Pole, who had always a great deal of courage and _savoir
faire_, spoke to Lady Glenmire, who on her part had seemed just as much
puzzled to know how to break the silence as we were.

“Has your ladyship been to Court lately?” asked she; and then gave a
little glance round at us, half timid and half triumphant, as much as to
say, “See how judiciously I have chosen a subject befitting the rank of
the stranger.”

“I never was there in my life,” said Lady Glenmire, with a broad Scotch
accent, but in a very sweet voice.  And then, as if she had been too
abrupt, she added: “We very seldom went to London—only twice, in fact,
during all my married life; and before I was married my father had far
too large a family” (fifth daughter of Mr Campbell was in all our minds,
I am sure) “to take us often from our home, even to Edinburgh.  Ye’ll
have been in Edinburgh, maybe?” said she, suddenly brightening up with
the hope of a common interest.  We had none of us been there; but Miss
Pole had an uncle who once had passed a night there, which was very
pleasant.

Mrs Jamieson, meanwhile, was absorbed in wonder why Mr Mulliner did not
bring the tea; and at length the wonder oozed out of her mouth.

“I had better ring the bell, my dear, had not I?” said Lady Glenmire
briskly.

“No—I think not—Mulliner does not like to be hurried.”

We should have liked our tea, for we dined at an earlier hour than Mrs
Jamieson.  I suspect Mr Mulliner had to finish the _St James’s
Chronicle_ before he chose to trouble himself about tea.  His mistress
fidgeted and fidgeted, and kept saying, “I can’t think why Mulliner does
not bring tea.  I can’t think what he can be about.”  And Lady Glenmire
at last grew quite impatient, but it was a pretty kind of impatience
after all; and she rang the bell rather sharply, on receiving a
half-permission from her sister-in-law to do so.  Mr Mulliner appeared
in dignified surprise. “Oh!” said Mrs Jamieson, “Lady Glenmire rang the
bell; I believe it was for tea.”

In a few minutes tea was brought.  Very delicate was the china, very old
the plate, very thin the bread and butter, and very small the lumps of
sugar.  Sugar was evidently Mrs Jamieson’s favourite economy.  I
question if the little filigree sugar-tongs, made something like
scissors, could have opened themselves wide enough to take up an honest,
vulgar good-sized piece; and when I tried to seize two little minnikin
pieces at once, so as not to be detected in too many returns to the
sugar-basin, they absolutely dropped one, with a little sharp clatter,
quite in a malicious and unnatural manner.  But before this happened we
had had a slight disappointment.  In the little silver jug was cream, in
the larger one was milk.  As soon as Mr Mulliner came in, Carlo began to
beg, which was a thing our manners forbade us to do, though I am sure we
were just as hungry; and Mrs Jamieson said she was certain we would
excuse her if she gave her poor dumb Carlo his tea first.  She
accordingly mixed a saucerful for him, and put it down for him to lap;
and then she told us how intelligent and sensible the dear little fellow
was; he knew cream quite well, and constantly refused tea with only milk
in it: so the milk was left for us; but we silently thought we were
quite as intelligent and sensible as Carlo, and felt as if insult were
added to injury when we were called upon to admire the gratitude evinced
by his wagging his tail for the cream which should have been ours.

After tea we thawed down into common-life subjects.  We were thankful to
Lady Glenmire for having proposed some more bread and butter, and this
mutual want made us better acquainted with her than we should ever have
been with talking about the Court, though Miss Pole did say she had
hoped to know how the dear Queen was from some one who had seen her.

The friendship begun over bread and butter extended on to cards.  Lady
Glenmire played Preference to admiration, and was a complete authority
as to Ombre and Quadrille.  Even Miss Pole quite forgot to say “my
lady,” and “your ladyship,” and said “Basto! ma’am”; “you have Spadille,
I believe,” just as quietly as if we had never held the great Cranford
Parliament on the subject of the proper mode of addressing a peeress.

As a proof of how thoroughly we had forgotten that we were in the
presence of one who might have sat down to tea with a coronet, instead
of a cap, on her head, Mrs Forrester related a curious little fact to
Lady Glenmire—an anecdote known to the circle of her intimate friends,
but of which even Mrs Jamieson was not aware.  It related to some fine
old lace, the sole relic of better days, which Lady Glenmire was
admiring on Mrs Forrester’s collar.

“Yes,” said that lady, “such lace cannot be got now for either love or
money; made by the nuns abroad, they tell me.  They say that they can’t
make it now even there.  But perhaps they can, now they’ve passed the
Catholic Emancipation Bill.  I should not wonder.  But, in the meantime,
I treasure up my lace very much.  I daren’t even trust the washing of it
to my maid” (the little charity school-girl I have named before, but who
sounded well as “my maid”).  “I always wash it myself.  And once it had
a narrow escape.  Of course, your ladyship knows that such lace must
never be starched or ironed.  Some people wash it in sugar and water,
and some in coffee, to make it the right yellow colour; but I myself
have a very good receipt for washing it in milk, which stiffens it
enough, and gives it a very good creamy colour.  Well, ma’am, I had
tacked it together (and the beauty of this fine lace is that, when it is
wet, it goes into a very little space), and put it to soak in milk,
when, unfortunately, I left the room; on my return, I found pussy on the
table, looking very like a thief, but gulping very uncomfortably, as if
she was half-chocked with something she wanted to swallow and could not.
 And, would you believe it?  At first I pitied her, and said ‘Poor
pussy! poor pussy!’ till, all at once, I looked and saw the cup of milk
empty—cleaned out!  ‘You naughty cat!’ said I, and I believe I was
provoked enough to give her a slap, which did no good, but only helped
the lace down—just as one slaps a choking child on the back.  I could
have cried, I was so vexed; but I determined I would not give the lace
up without a struggle for it.  I hoped the lace might disagree with her,
at any rate; but it would have been too much for Job, if he had seen, as
I did, that cat come in, quite placid and purring, not a quarter of an
hour after, and almost expecting to be stroked.  ‘No, pussy!’ said I,
‘if you have any conscience you ought not to expect that!’  And then a
thought struck me; and I rang the bell for my maid, and sent her to Mr
Hoggins, with my compliments, and would he be kind enough to lend me one
of his top-boots for an hour?  I did not think there was anything odd in
the message; but Jenny said the young men in the surgery laughed as if
they would be ill at my wanting a top-boot.  When it came, Jenny and I
put pussy in, with her forefeet straight down, so that they were
fastened, and could not scratch, and we gave her a teaspoonful of
current-jelly in which (your ladyship must excuse me) I had mixed some
tartar emetic.  I shall never forget how anxious I was for the next
half-hour.  I took pussy to my own room, and spread a clean towel on the
floor.  I could have kissed her when she returned the lace to sight,
very much as it had gone down.  Jenny had boiling water ready, and we
soaked it and soaked it, and spread it on a lavender-bush in the sun
before I could touch it again, even to put it in milk.  But now your
ladyship would never guess that it had been in pussy’s inside.”

          [Picture: We gave her a teaspoonful of current-jelly]

We found out, in the course of the evening, that Lady Glenmire was going
to pay Mrs Jamieson a long visit, as she had given up her apartments in
Edinburgh, and had no ties to take her back there in a hurry.  On the
whole, we were rather glad to hear this, for she had made a pleasant
impression upon us; and it was also very comfortable to find, from
things which dropped out in the course of conversation, that, in
addition to many other genteel qualities, she was far removed from the
“vulgarity of wealth.”

“Don’t you find it very unpleasant walking?” asked Mrs Jamieson, as our
respective servants were announced.  It was a pretty regular question
from Mrs Jamieson, who had her own carriage in the coach-house, and
always went out in a sedan-chair to the very shortest distances.  The
answers were nearly as much a matter of course.

“Oh dear, no! it is so pleasant and still at night!”  “Such a
refreshment after the excitement of a party!”  “The stars are so
beautiful!”  This last was from Miss Matty.

“Are you fond of astronomy?” Lady Glenmire asked.

“Not very,” replied Miss Matty, rather confused at the moment to
remember which was astronomy and which was astrology—but the answer was
true under either circumstance, for she read, and was slightly alarmed
at Francis Moore’s astrological predictions; and, as to astronomy, in a
private and confidential conversation, she had told me she never could
believe that the earth was moving constantly, and that she would not
believe it if she could, it made her feel so tired and dizzy whenever
she thought about it.

In our pattens we picked our way home with extra care that night, so
refined and delicate were our perceptions after drinking tea with “my
lady.”




CHAPTER IX.
SIGNOR BRUNONI


SOON after the events of which I gave an account in my last paper, I was
summoned home by my father’s illness; and for a time I forgot, in
anxiety about him, to wonder how my dear friends at Cranford were
getting on, or how Lady Glenmire could reconcile herself to the dulness
of the long visit which she was still paying to her sister-in-law, Mrs
Jamieson. When my father grew a little stronger I accompanied him to the
seaside, so that altogether I seemed banished from Cranford, and was
deprived of the opportunity of hearing any chance intelligence of the
dear little town for the greater part of that year.

Late in November—when we had returned home again, and my father was once
more in good health—I received a letter from Miss Matty; and a very
mysterious letter it was.  She began many sentences without ending them,
running them one into another, in much the same confused sort of way in
which written words run together on blotting-paper.  All I could make
out was that, if my father was better (which she hoped he was), and
would take warning and wear a great-coat from Michaelmas to Lady-day, if
turbans were in fashion, could I tell her?  Such a piece of gaiety was
going to happen as had not been seen or known of since Wombwell’s lions
came, when one of them ate a little child’s arm; and she was, perhaps,
too old to care about dress, but a new cap she must have; and, having
heard that turbans were worn, and some of the county families likely to
come, she would like to look tidy, if I would bring her a cap from the
milliner I employed; and oh, dear! how careless of her to forget that
she wrote to beg I would come and pay her a visit next Tuesday; when she
hoped to have something to offer me in the way of amusement, which she
would not now more particularly describe, only sea-green was her
favourite colour.  So she ended her letter; but in a P.S. she added, she
thought she might as well tell me what was the peculiar attraction to
Cranford just now; Signor Brunoni was going to exhibit his wonderful
magic in the Cranford Assembly Rooms on Wednesday and Friday evening in
the following week.

I was very glad to accept the invitation from my dear Miss Matty,
independently of the conjuror, and most particularly anxious to prevent
her from disfiguring her small, gentle, mousey face with a great
Saracen’s head turban; and accordingly, I bought her a pretty, neat,
middle-aged cap, which, however, was rather a disappointment to her
when, on my arrival, she followed me into my bedroom, ostensibly to poke
the fire, but in reality, I do believe, to see if the sea-green turban
was not inside the cap-box with which I had travelled.  It was in vain
that I twirled the cap round on my hand to exhibit back and side fronts:
her heart had been set upon a turban, and all she could do was to say,
with resignation in her look and voice—

“I am sure you did your best, my dear.  It is just like the caps all the
ladies in Cranford are wearing, and they have had theirs for a year, I
dare say.  I should have liked something newer, I confess—something more
like the turbans Miss Betty Barker tells me Queen Adelaide wears; but it
is very pretty, my dear.  And I dare say lavender will wear better than
sea-green.  Well, after all, what is dress, that we should care anything
about it?  You’ll tell me if you want anything, my dear.  Here is the
bell.  I suppose turbans have not got down to Drumble yet?”

So saying, the dear old lady gently bemoaned herself out of the room,
leaving me to dress for the evening, when, as she informed me, she
expected Miss Pole and Mrs Forrester, and she hoped I should not feel
myself too much tired to join the party.  Of course I should not; and I
made some haste to unpack and arrange my dress; but, with all my speed,
I heard the arrivals and the buzz of conversation in the next room
before I was ready.  Just as I opened the door, I caught the words, “I
was foolish to expect anything very genteel out of the Drumble shops;
poor girl! she did her best, I’ve no doubt.”  But, for all that, I had
rather that she blamed Drumble and me than disfigured herself with a
turban.

Miss Pole was always the person, in the trio of Cranford ladies now
assembled, to have had adventures.  She was in the habit of spending the
morning in rambling from shop to shop, not to purchase anything (except
an occasional reel of cotton or a piece of tape), but to see the new
articles and report upon them, and to collect all the stray pieces of
intelligence in the town.  She had a way, too, of demurely popping
hither and thither into all sorts of places to gratify her curiosity on
any point—a way which, if she had not looked so very genteel and prim,
might have been considered impertinent.  And now, by the expressive way
in which she cleared her throat, and waited for all minor subjects (such
as caps and turbans) to be cleared off the course, we knew she had
something very particular to relate, when the due pause came—and I defy
any people possessed of common modesty to keep up a conversation long,
where one among them sits up aloft in silence, looking down upon all the
things they chance to say as trivial and contemptible compared to what
they could disclose, if properly entreated.  Miss Pole began—

“As I was stepping out of Gordon’s shop to-day, I chanced to go into the
‘George’ (my Betty has a second-cousin who is chambermaid there, and I
thought Betty would like to hear how she was), and, not seeing anyone
about, I strolled up the staircase, and found myself in the passage
leading to the Assembly Room (you and I remember the Assembly Room, I am
sure, Miss Matty! and the minuets de la cour!); so I went on, not
thinking of what I was about, when, all at once, I perceived that I was
in the middle of the preparations for to-morrow night—the room being
divided with great clothes-maids, over which Crosby’s men were tacking
red flannel; very dark and odd it seemed; it quite bewildered me, and I
was going on behind the screens, in my absence of mind, when a
gentleman (quite the gentleman, I can assure you) stepped forwards and
asked if I had any business he could arrange for me.  He spoke such
pretty broken English, I could not help thinking of Thaddeus of Warsaw,
and the Hungarian Brothers, and Santo Sebastiani; and while I was busy
picturing his past life to myself, he had bowed me out of the room.  But
wait a minute!  You have not heard half my story yet!  I was going
downstairs, when who should I meet but Betty’s second-cousin.  So, of
course, I stopped to speak to her for Betty’s sake; and she told me that
I had really seen the conjuror—the gentleman who spoke broken English
was Signor Brunoni himself.  Just at this moment he passed us on the
stairs, making such a graceful bow! in reply to which I dropped a
curtsey—all foreigners have such polite manners, one catches something
of it.  But when he had gone downstairs, I bethought me that I had
dropped my glove in the Assembly Room (it was safe in my muff all the
time, but I never found it till afterwards); so I went back, and, just
as I was creeping up the passage left on one side of the great screen
that goes nearly across the room, who should I see but the very same
gentleman that had met me before, and passed me on the stairs, coming
now forwards from the inner part of the room, to which there is no
entrance—you remember, Miss Matty—and just repeating, in his pretty
broken English, the inquiry if I had any business there—I don’t mean
that he put it quite so bluntly, but he seemed very determined that I
should not pass the screen—so, of course, I explained about my glove,
which, curiously enough, I found at that very moment.”

Miss Pole, then, had seen the conjuror—the real, live conjuror! and
numerous were the questions we all asked her.  “Had he a beard?”  “Was
he young, or old?”  “Fair, or dark?”  “Did he look”—(unable to shape my
question prudently, I put it in another form)—“How did he look?”  In
short, Miss Pole was the heroine of the evening, owing to her morning’s
encounter.  If she was not the rose (that is to say the conjuror) she
had been near it.

Conjuration, sleight of hand, magic, witchcraft, were the subjects of
the evening.  Miss Pole was slightly sceptical, and inclined to think
there might be a scientific solution found for even the proceedings of
the Witch of Endor.  Mrs Forrester believed everything, from ghosts to
death-watches.  Miss Matty ranged between the two—always convinced by
the last speaker.  I think she was naturally more inclined to Mrs
Forrester’s side, but a desire of proving herself a worthy sister to
Miss Jenkyns kept her equally balanced—Miss Jenkyns, who would never
allow a servant to call the little rolls of tallow that formed
themselves round candles “winding-sheets,” but insisted on their being
spoken of as “roley-poleys!”  A sister of hers to be superstitious!  It
would never do.

After tea, I was despatched downstairs into the dining-parlour for that
volume of the old Encyclopædia which contained the nouns beginning with
C, in order that Miss Pole might prime herself with scientific
explanations for the tricks of the following evening.  It spoilt the
pool at Preference which Miss Matty and Mrs Forrester had been looking
forward to, for Miss Pole became so much absorbed in her subject, and
the plates by which it was illustrated, that we felt it would be cruel
to disturb her otherwise than by one or two well-timed yawns, which I
threw in now and then, for I was really touched by the meek way in which
the two ladies were bearing their disappointment.  But Miss Pole only
read the more zealously, imparting to us no more information than this—

“Ah! I see; I comprehend perfectly.  A represents the ball.  Put A
between B and D—no! between C and F, and turn the second joint of the
third finger of your left hand over the wrist of your right H.  Very
clear indeed!  My dear Mrs Forrester, conjuring and witchcraft is a mere
affair of the alphabet.  Do let me read you this one passage?”

Mrs Forrester implored Miss Pole to spare her, saying, from a child
upwards, she never could understand being read aloud to; and I dropped
the pack of cards, which I had been shuffling very audibly, and by this
discreet movement I obliged Miss Pole to perceive that Preference was to
have been the order of the evening, and to propose, rather unwillingly,
that the pool should commence.  The pleasant brightness that stole over
the other two ladies’ faces on this!  Miss Matty had one or two twinges
of self-reproach for having interrupted Miss Pole in her studies: and
did not remember her cards well, or give her full attention to the game,
until she had soothed her conscience by offering to lend the volume of
the Encyclopædia to Miss Pole, who accepted it thankfully, and said
Betty should take it home when she came with the lantern.

The next evening we were all in a little gentle flutter at the idea of
the gaiety before us.  Miss Matty went up to dress betimes, and hurried
me until I was ready, when we found we had an hour-and-a-half to wait
before the “doors opened at seven precisely.”  And we had only twenty
yards to go!  However, as Miss Matty said, it would not do to get too
much absorbed in anything, and forget the time; so she thought we had
better sit quietly, without lighting the candles, till five minutes to
seven.  So Miss Matty dozed, and I knitted.

At length we set off; and at the door under the carriage-way at the
“George,” we met Mrs Forrester and Miss Pole: the latter was discussing
the subject of the evening with more vehemence than ever, and throwing
X’s and B’s at our heads like hailstones.  She had even copied one or
two of the “receipts”—as she called them—for the different tricks, on
backs of letters, ready to explain and to detect Signor Brunoni’s arts.

We went into the cloak-room adjoining the Assembly Room; Miss Matty gave
a sigh or two to her departed youth, and the remembrance of the last
time she had been there, as she adjusted her pretty new cap before the
strange, quaint old mirror in the cloak-room.  The Assembly Room had
been added to the inn, about a hundred years before, by the different
county families, who met together there once a month during the winter
to dance and play at cards.  Many a county beauty had first swung
through the minuet that she afterwards danced before Queen Charlotte in
this very room.  It was said that one of the Gunnings had graced the
apartment with her beauty; it was certain that a rich and beautiful
widow, Lady Williams, had here been smitten with the noble figure of a
young artist, who was staying with some family in the neighbourhood for
professional purposes, and accompanied his patrons to the Cranford
Assembly.  And a pretty bargain poor Lady Williams had of her handsome
husband, if all tales were true.  Now, no beauty blushed and dimpled
along the sides of the Cranford Assembly Room; no handsome artist won
hearts by his bow, _chapeau bras_ in hand; the old room was dingy; the
salmon-coloured paint had faded into a drab; great pieces of plaster had
chipped off from the fine wreaths and festoons on its walls; but still a
mouldy odour of aristocracy lingered about the place, and a dusty
recollection of the days that were gone made Miss Matty and Mrs
Forrester bridle up as they entered, and walk mincingly up the room, as
if there were a number of genteel observers, instead of two little boys
with a stick of toffee between them with which to beguile the time.

We stopped short at the second front row; I could hardly understand why,
until I heard Miss Pole ask a stray waiter if any of the county families
were expected; and when he shook his head, and believed not, Mrs
Forrester and Miss Matty moved forwards, and our party represented a
conversational square.  The front row was soon augmented and enriched by
Lady Glenmire and Mrs Jamieson.  We six occupied the two front rows, and
our aristocratic seclusion was respected by the groups of shopkeepers
who strayed in from time to time and huddled together on the back
benches.  At least I conjectured so, from the noise they made, and the
sonorous bumps they gave in sitting down; but when, in weariness of the
obstinate green curtain that would not draw up, but would stare at me
with two odd eyes, seen through holes, as in the old tapestry story, I
would fain have looked round at the merry chattering people behind me,
Miss Pole clutched my arm, and begged me not to turn, for “it was not
the thing.”  What “the thing” was, I never could find out, but it must
have been something eminently dull and tiresome.  However, we all sat
eyes right, square front, gazing at the tantalising curtain, and hardly
speaking intelligibly, we were so afraid of being caught in the
vulgarity of making any noise in a place of public amusement.  Mrs
Jamieson was the most fortunate, for she fell asleep.

At length the eyes disappeared—the curtain quivered—one side went up
before the other, which stuck fast; it was dropped again, and, with a
fresh effort, and a vigorous pull from some unseen hand, it flew up,
revealing to our sight a magnificent gentleman in the Turkish costume,
seated before a little table, gazing at us (I should have said with the
same eyes that I had last seen through the hole in the curtain) with
calm and condescending dignity, “like a being of another sphere,” as I
heard a sentimental voice ejaculate behind me.

“That’s not Signor Brunoni!” said Miss Pole decidedly; and so audibly
that I am sure he heard, for he glanced down over his flowing beard at
our party with an air of mute reproach.  “Signor Brunoni had no
beard—but perhaps he’ll come soon.”  So she lulled herself into
patience. Meanwhile, Miss Matty had reconnoitred through her eye-glass,
wiped it, and looked again.  Then she turned round, and said to me, in a
kind, mild, sorrowful tone—

“You see, my dear, turbans _are_ worn.”

But we had no time for more conversation.  The Grand Turk, as Miss Pole
chose to call him, arose and announced himself as Signor Brunoni.

“I don’t believe him!” exclaimed Miss Pole, in a defiant manner.  He
looked at her again, with the same dignified upbraiding in his
countenance.  “I don’t!” she repeated more positively than ever.
“Signor Brunoni had not got that muffy sort of thing about his chin, but
looked like a close-shaved Christian gentleman.”

Miss Pole’s energetic speeches had the good effect of wakening up Mrs
Jamieson, who opened her eyes wide, in sign of the deepest attention—a
proceeding which silenced Miss Pole and encouraged the Grand Turk to
proceed, which he did in very broken English—so broken that there was no
cohesion between the parts of his sentences; a fact which he himself
perceived at last, and so left off speaking and proceeded to action.

Now we _were_ astonished.  How he did his tricks I could not imagine;
no, not even when Miss Pole pulled out her pieces of paper and began
reading aloud—or at least in a very audible whisper—the separate
“receipts” for the most common of his tricks.  If ever I saw a man frown
and look enraged, I saw the Grand Turk frown at Miss Pole; but, as she
said, what could be expected but unchristian looks from a Mussulman?  If
Miss Pole were sceptical, and more engrossed with her receipts and
diagrams than with his tricks, Miss Matty and Mrs Forrester were
mystified and perplexed to the highest degree.  Mrs Jamieson kept taking
her spectacles off and wiping them, as if she thought it was something
defective in them which made the legerdemain; and Lady Glenmire, who had
seen many curious sights in Edinburgh, was very much struck with the
tricks, and would not at all agree with Miss Pole, who declared that
anybody could do them with a little practice, and that she would,
herself, undertake to do all he did, with two hours given to study the
Encyclopædia and make her third finger flexible.

At last Miss Matty and Mrs Forrester became perfectly awestricken.  They
whispered together.  I sat just behind them, so I could not help hearing
what they were saying.  Miss Matty asked Mrs Forrester “if she thought
it was quite right to have come to see such things?  She could not help
fearing they were lending encouragement to something that was not
quite”— A little shake of the head filled up the blank.  Mrs Forrester
replied, that the same thought had crossed her mind; she too was feeling
very uncomfortable, it was so very strange.  She was quite certain that
it was her pocket-handkerchief which was in that loaf just now; and it
had been in her own hand not five minutes before.  She wondered who had
furnished the bread?  She was sure it could not be Dakin, because he was
the churchwarden.  Suddenly Miss Matty half-turned towards me—

“Will you look, my dear—you are a stranger in the town, and it won’t
give rise to unpleasant reports—will you just look round and see if the
rector is here?  If he is, I think we may conclude that this wonderful
man is sanctioned by the Church, and that will be a great relief to my
mind.”

I looked, and I saw the tall, thin, dry, dusty rector, sitting
surrounded by National School boys, guarded by troops of his own sex
from any approach of the many Cranford spinsters.  His kind face was all
agape with broad smiles, and the boys around him were in chinks of
laughing.  I told Miss Matty that the Church was smiling approval, which
set her mind at ease.

                 [Picture: Afraid of matrimonial reports]

I have never named Mr Hayter, the rector, because I, as a well-to-do and
happy young woman, never came in contact with him.  He was an old
bachelor, but as afraid of matrimonial reports getting abroad about him
as any girl of eighteen: and he would rush into a shop or dive down an
entry, sooner than encounter any of the Cranford ladies in the street;
and, as for the Preference parties, I did not wonder at his not
accepting invitations to them.  To tell the truth, I always suspected
Miss Pole of having given very vigorous chase to Mr Hayter when he first
came to Cranford; and not the less, because now she appeared to share so
vividly in his dread lest her name should ever be coupled with his.  He
found all his interests among the poor and helpless; he had treated the
National School boys this very night to the performance; and virtue was
for once its own reward, for they guarded him right and left, and clung
round him as if he had been the queen-bee and they the swarm.  He felt
so safe in their environment that he could even afford to give our party
a bow as we filed out.  Miss Pole ignored his presence, and pretended to
be absorbed in convincing us that we had been cheated, and had not seen
Signor Brunoni after all.




CHAPTER X.
THE PANIC


I THINK a series of circumstances dated from Signor Brunoni’s visit to
Cranford, which seemed at the time connected in our minds with him,
though I don’t know that he had anything really to do with them.  All at
once all sorts of uncomfortable rumours got afloat in the town.  There
were one or two robberies—real _bonâ fide_ robberies; men had up before
the magistrates and committed for trial—and that seemed to make us all
afraid of being robbed; and for a long time, at Miss Matty’s, I know, we
used to make a regular expedition all round the kitchens and cellars
every night, Miss Matty leading the way, armed with the poker, I
following with the hearth-brush, and Martha carrying the shovel and
fire-irons with which to sound the alarm; and by the accidental hitting
together of them she often frightened us so much that we bolted
ourselves up, all three together, in the back-kitchen, or store-room, or
wherever we happened to be, till, when our affright was over, we
recollected ourselves and set out afresh with double valiance.  By day
we heard strange stories from the shopkeepers and cottagers, of carts
that went about in the dead of night, drawn by horses shod with felt,
and guarded by men in dark clothes, going round the town, no doubt in
search of some unwatched house or some unfastened door.

Miss Pole, who affected great bravery herself, was the principal person
to collect and arrange these reports so as to make them assume their
most fearful aspect.  But we discovered that she had begged one of Mr
Hoggins’s worn-out hats to hang up in her lobby, and we (at least I) had
doubts as to whether she really would enjoy the little adventure of
having her house broken into, as she protested she should.  Miss Matty
made no secret of being an arrant coward, but she went regularly through
her housekeeper’s duty of inspection—only the hour for this became
earlier and earlier, till at last we went the rounds at half-past six,
and Miss Matty adjourned to bed soon after seven, “in order to get the
night over the sooner.”

Cranford had so long piqued itself on being an honest and moral town
that it had grown to fancy itself too genteel and well-bred to be
otherwise, and felt the stain upon its character at this time doubly.
But we comforted ourselves with the assurance which we gave to each
other that the robberies could never have been committed by any Cranford
person; it must have been a stranger or strangers who brought this
disgrace upon the town, and occasioned as many precautions as if we were
living among the Red Indians or the French.

This last comparison of our nightly state of defence and fortification
was made by Mrs Forrester, whose father had served under General
Burgoyne in the American war, and whose husband had fought the French in
Spain. She indeed inclined to the idea that, in some way, the French
were connected with the small thefts, which were ascertained facts, and
the burglaries and highway robberies, which were rumours.  She had been
deeply impressed with the idea of French spies at some time in her life;
and the notion could never be fairly eradicated, but sprang up again
from time to time.  And now her theory was this:—The Cranford people
respected themselves too much, and were too grateful to the aristocracy
who were so kind as to live near the town, ever to disgrace their
bringing up by being dishonest or immoral; therefore, we must believe
that the robbers were strangers—if strangers, why not foreigners?—if
foreigners, who so likely as the French?  Signor Brunoni spoke broken
English like a Frenchman; and, though he wore a turban like a Turk, Mrs
Forrester had seen a print of Madame de Staël with a turban on, and
another of Mr Denon in just such a dress as that in which the conjuror
had made his appearance, showing clearly that the French, as well as the
Turks, wore turbans.  There could be no doubt Signor Brunoni was a
Frenchman—a French spy come to discover the weak and undefended places
of England, and doubtless he had his accomplices.  For her part, she,
Mrs Forrester, had always had her own opinion of Miss Pole’s adventure
at the “George Inn”—seeing two men where only one was believed to be.
French people had ways and means which, she was thankful to say, the
English knew nothing about; and she had never felt quite easy in her
mind about going to see that conjuror—it was rather too much like a
forbidden thing, though the rector was there.  In short, Mrs Forrester
grew more excited than we had ever known her before, and, being an
officer’s daughter and widow, we looked up to her opinion, of course.

Really I do not know how much was true or false in the reports which
flew about like wildfire just at this time; but it seemed to me then
that there was every reason to believe that at Mardon (a small town
about eight miles from Cranford) houses and shops were entered by holes
made in the walls, the bricks being silently carried away in the dead of
the night, and all done so quietly that no sound was heard either in or
out of the house.  Miss Matty gave it up in despair when she heard of
this. “What was the use,” said she, “of locks and bolts, and bells to
the windows, and going round the house every night?  That last trick was
fit for a conjuror.  Now she did believe that Signor Brunoni was at the
bottom of it.”

One afternoon, about five o’clock, we were startled by a hasty knock at
the door.  Miss Matty bade me run and tell Martha on no account to open
the door till she (Miss Matty) had reconnoitred through the window; and
she armed herself with a footstool to drop down on the head of the
visitor, in case he should show a face covered with black crape, as he
looked up in answer to her inquiry of who was there.  But it was nobody
but Miss Pole and Betty.  The former came upstairs, carrying a little
hand-basket, and she was evidently in a state of great agitation.

“Take care of that!” said she to me, as I offered to relieve her of her
basket.  “It’s my plate.  I am sure there is a plan to rob my house
to-night.  I am come to throw myself on your hospitality, Miss Matty.
Betty is going to sleep with her cousin at the ‘George.’  I can sit up
here all night if you will allow me; but my house is so far from any
neighbours, and I don’t believe we could be heard if we screamed ever
so!”

“But,” said Miss Matty, “what has alarmed you so much?  Have you seen
any men lurking about the house?”

“Oh, yes!” answered Miss Pole.  “Two very bad-looking men have gone
three times past the house, very slowly; and an Irish beggar-woman came
not half-an-hour ago, and all but forced herself in past Betty, saying
her children were starving, and she must speak to the mistress.  You
see, she said ‘mistress,’ though there was a hat hanging up in the hall,
and it would have been more natural to have said ‘master.’  But Betty
shut the door in her face, and came up to me, and we got the spoons
together, and sat in the parlour-window watching till we saw Thomas
Jones going from his work, when we called to him and asked him to take
care of us into the town.”

We might have triumphed over Miss Pole, who had professed such bravery
until she was frightened; but we were too glad to perceive that she
shared in the weaknesses of humanity to exult over her; and I gave up my
room to her very willingly, and shared Miss Matty’s bed for the night.
But before we retired, the two ladies rummaged up, out of the recesses
of their memory, such horrid stories of robbery and murder that I quite
quaked in my shoes.  Miss Pole was evidently anxious to prove that such
terrible events had occurred within her experience that she was
justified in her sudden panic; and Miss Matty did not like to be
outdone, and capped every story with one yet more horrible, till it
reminded me oddly enough, of an old story I had read somewhere, of a
nightingale and a musician, who strove one against the other which could
produce the most admirable music, till poor Philomel dropped down dead.

One of the stories that haunted me for a long time afterwards was of a
girl who was left in charge of a great house in Cumberland on some
particular fair-day, when the other servants all went off to the
gaieties.  The family were away in London, and a pedlar came by, and
asked to leave his large and heavy pack in the kitchen, saying he would
call for it again at night; and the girl (a gamekeeper’s daughter),
roaming about in search of amusement, chanced to hit upon a gun hanging
up in the hall, and took it down to look at the chasing; and it went off
through the open kitchen door, hit the pack, and a slow dark thread of
blood came oozing out. (How Miss Pole enjoyed this part of the story,
dwelling on each word as if she loved it!)  She rather hurried over the
further account of the girl’s bravery, and I have but a confused idea
that, somehow, she baffled the robbers with Italian irons, heated
red-hot, and then restored to blackness by being dipped in grease.

We parted for the night with an awe-stricken wonder as to what we should
hear of in the morning—and, on my part, with a vehement desire for the
night to be over and gone: I was so afraid lest the robbers should have
seen, from some dark lurking-place, that Miss Pole had carried off her
plate, and thus have a double motive for attacking our house.

                 [Picture: Asked him to take care of us]

But until Lady Glenmire came to call next day we heard of nothing
unusual.  The kitchen fire-irons were in exactly the same position
against the back door as when Martha and I had skilfully piled them up,
like spillikins, ready to fall with an awful clatter if only a cat had
touched the outside panels.  I had wondered what we should all do if
thus awakened and alarmed, and had proposed to Miss Matty that we should
cover up our faces under the bed-clothes so that there should be no
danger of the robbers thinking that we could identify them; but Miss
Matty, who was trembling very much, scouted this idea, and said we owed
it to society to apprehend them, and that she should certainly do her
best to lay hold of them and lock them up in the garret till morning.

When Lady Glenmire came, we almost felt jealous of her.  Mrs Jamieson’s
house had really been attacked; at least there were men’s footsteps to
be seen on the flower borders, underneath the kitchen windows, “where
nae men should be;” and Carlo had barked all through the night as if
strangers were abroad.  Mrs Jamieson had been awakened by Lady Glenmire,
and they had rung the bell which communicated with Mr Mulliner’s room in
the third storey, and when his night-capped head had appeared over the
bannisters, in answer to the summons, they had told him of their alarm,
and the reasons for it; whereupon he retreated into his bedroom, and
locked the door (for fear of draughts, as he informed them in the
morning), and opened the window, and called out valiantly to say, if the
supposed robbers would come to him he would fight them; but, as Lady
Glenmire observed, that was but poor comfort, since they would have to
pass by Mrs Jamieson’s room and her own before they could reach him, and
must be of a very pugnacious disposition indeed if they neglected the
opportunities of robbery presented by the unguarded lower storeys, to go
up to a garret, and there force a door in order to get at the champion
of the house.  Lady Glenmire, after waiting and listening for some time
in the drawing-room, had proposed to Mrs Jamieson that they should go to
bed; but that lady said she should not feel comfortable unless she sat
up and watched; and, accordingly, she packed herself warmly up on the
sofa, where she was found by the housemaid, when she came into the room
at six o’clock, fast asleep; but Lady Glenmire went to bed, and kept
awake all night.

When Miss Pole heard of this, she nodded her head in great satisfaction.
She had been sure we should hear of something happening in Cranford that
night; and we had heard.  It was clear enough they had first proposed to
attack her house; but when they saw that she and Betty were on their
guard, and had carried off the plate, they had changed their tactics and
gone to Mrs Jamieson’s, and no one knew what might have happened if
Carlo had not barked, like a good dog as he was!

Poor Carlo! his barking days were nearly over.  Whether the gang who
infested the neighbourhood were afraid of him, or whether they were
revengeful enough, for the way in which he had baffled them on the night
in question, to poison him; or whether, as some among the more
uneducated people thought, he died of apoplexy, brought on by too much
feeding and too little exercise; at any rate, it is certain that, two
days after this eventful night, Carlo was found dead, with his poor legs
stretched out stiff in the attitude of running, as if by such unusual
exertion he could escape the sure pursuer, Death.

We were all sorry for Carlo, the old familiar friend who had snapped at
us for so many years; and the mysterious mode of his death made us very
uncomfortable.  Could Signor Brunoni be at the bottom of this?  He had
apparently killed a canary with only a word of command; his will seemed
of deadly force; who knew but what he might yet be lingering in the
neighbourhood willing all sorts of awful things!

We whispered these fancies among ourselves in the evenings; but in the
mornings our courage came back with the daylight, and in a week’s time
we had got over the shock of Carlo’s death; all but Mrs Jamieson.  She,
poor thing, felt it as she had felt no event since her husband’s death;
indeed, Miss Pole said, that as the Honourable Mr Jamieson drank a good
deal, and occasioned her much uneasiness, it was possible that Carlo’s
death might be the greater affliction.  But there was always a tinge of
cynicism in Miss Pole’s remarks.  However, one thing was clear and
certain—it was necessary for Mrs Jamieson to have some change of scene;
and Mr Mulliner was very impressive on this point, shaking his head
whenever we inquired after his mistress, and speaking of her loss of
appetite and bad nights very ominously; and with justice too, for if she
had two characteristics in her natural state of health they were a
facility of eating and sleeping.  If she could neither eat nor sleep,
she must be indeed out of spirits and out of health.

Lady Glenmire (who had evidently taken very kindly to Cranford) did not
like the idea of Mrs Jamieson’s going to Cheltenham, and more than once
insinuated pretty plainly that it was Mr Mulliner’s doing, who had been
much alarmed on the occasion of the house being attacked, and since had
said, more than once, that he felt it a very responsible charge to have
to defend so many women.  Be that as it might, Mrs Jamieson went to
Cheltenham, escorted by Mr Mulliner; and Lady Glenmire remained in
possession of the house, her ostensible office being to take care that
the maid-servants did not pick up followers.  She made a very
pleasant-looking dragon; and, as soon as it was arranged for her stay in
Cranford, she found out that Mrs Jamieson’s visit to Cheltenham was just
the best thing in the world.  She had let her house in Edinburgh, and
was for the time house-less, so the charge of her sister-in-law’s
comfortable abode was very convenient and acceptable.

Miss Pole was very much inclined to instal herself as a heroine, because
of the decided steps she had taken in flying from the two men and one
woman, whom she entitled “that murderous gang.”  She described their
appearance in glowing colours, and I noticed that every time she went
over the story some fresh trait of villainy was added to their
appearance.  One was tall—he grew to be gigantic in height before we had
done with him; he of course had black hair—and by-and-by it hung in
elf-locks over his forehead and down his back.  The other was short and
broad—and a hump sprouted out on his shoulder before we heard the last
of him; he had red hair—which deepened into carroty; and she was almost
sure he had a cast in the eye—a decided squint.  As for the woman, her
eyes glared, and she was masculine-looking—a perfect virago; most
probably a man dressed in woman’s clothes; afterwards, we heard of a
beard on her chin, and a manly voice and a stride.

If Miss Pole was delighted to recount the events of that afternoon to
all inquirers, others were not so proud of their adventures in the
robbery line.  Mr Hoggins, the surgeon, had been attacked at his own
door by two ruffians, who were concealed in the shadow of the porch, and
so effectually silenced him that he was robbed in the interval between
ringing his bell and the servant’s answering it.  Miss Pole was sure it
would turn out that this robbery had been committed by “her men,” and
went the very day she heard the report to have her teeth examined, and
to question Mr Hoggins.  She came to us afterwards; so we heard what she
had heard, straight and direct from the source, while we were yet in the
excitement and flutter of the agitation caused by the first
intelligence; for the event had only occurred the night before.

“Well!” said Miss Pole, sitting down with the decision of a person who
has made up her mind as to the nature of life and the world (and such
people never tread lightly, or seat themselves without a bump), “well,
Miss Matty! men will be men.  Every mother’s son of them wishes to be
considered Samson and Solomon rolled into one—too strong ever to be
beaten or discomfited—too wise ever to be outwitted.  If you will
notice, they have always foreseen events, though they never tell one for
one’s warning before the events happen.  My father was a man, and I know
the sex pretty well.”

She had talked herself out of breath, and we should have been very glad
to fill up the necessary pause as chorus, but we did not exactly know
what to say, or which man had suggested this diatribe against the sex;
so we only joined in generally, with a grave shake of the head, and a
soft murmur of “They are very incomprehensible, certainly!”

“Now, only think,” said she.  “There, I have undergone the risk of
having one of my remaining teeth drawn (for one is terribly at the mercy
of any surgeon-dentist; and I, for one, always speak them fair till I
have got my mouth out of their clutches), and, after all, Mr Hoggins is
too much of a man to own that he was robbed last night.”

“Not robbed!” exclaimed the chorus.

“Don’t tell me!” Miss Pole exclaimed, angry that we could be for a
moment imposed upon.  “I believe he was robbed, just as Betty told me,
and he is ashamed to own it; and, to be sure, it was very silly of him
to be robbed just at his own door; I daresay he feels that such a thing
won’t raise him in the eyes of Cranford society, and is anxious to
conceal it—but he need not have tried to impose upon me, by saying I
must have heard an exaggerated account of some petty theft of a neck of
mutton, which, it seems, was stolen out of the safe in his yard last
week; he had the impertinence to add, he believed that that was taken by
the cat.  I have no doubt, if I could get at the bottom of it, it was
that Irishman dressed up in woman’s clothes, who came spying about my
house, with the story about the starving children.”

After we had duly condemned the want of candour which Mr Hoggins had
evinced, and abused men in general, taking him for the representative
and type, we got round to the subject about which we had been talking
when Miss Pole came in; namely, how far, in the present disturbed state
of the country, we could venture to accept an invitation which Miss
Matty had just received from Mrs Forrester, to come as usual and keep
the anniversary of her wedding-day by drinking tea with her at five
o’clock, and playing a quiet pool afterwards.  Mrs Forrester had said
that she asked us with some diffidence, because the roads were, she
feared, very unsafe.  But she suggested that perhaps one of us would not
object to take the sedan, and that the others, by walking briskly, might
keep up with the long trot of the chairmen, and so we might all arrive
safely at Over Place, a suburb of the town.  (No; that is too large an
expression: a small cluster of houses separated from Cranford by about
two hundred yards of a dark and lonely lane.)  There was no doubt but
that a similar note was awaiting Miss Pole at home; so her call was a
very fortunate affair, as it enabled us to consult together.  We would
all much rather have declined this invitation; but we felt that it would
not be quite kind to Mrs Forrester, who would otherwise be left to a
solitary retrospect of her not very happy or fortunate life.  Miss Matty
and Miss Pole had been visitors on this occasion for many years, and now
they gallantly determined to nail their colours to the mast, and to go
through Darkness Lane rather than fail in loyalty to their friend.

But when the evening came, Miss Matty (for it was she who was voted into
the chair, as she had a cold), before being shut down in the sedan, like
jack-in-a-box, implored the chairmen, whatever might befall, not to run
away and leave her fastened up there, to be murdered; and even after
they had promised, I saw her tighten her features into the stern
determination of a martyr, and she gave me a melancholy and ominous
shake of the head through the glass.  However, we got there safely, only
rather out of breath, for it was who could trot hardest through Darkness
Lane, and I am afraid poor Miss Matty was sadly jolted.

Mrs Forrester had made extra preparations, in acknowledgment of our
exertion in coming to see her through such dangers.  The usual forms of
genteel ignorance as to what her servants might send up were all gone
through; and harmony and Preference seemed likely to be the order of the
evening, but for an interesting conversation that began I don’t know
how, but which had relation, of course, to the robbers who infested the
neighbourhood of Cranford.

Having braved the dangers of Darkness Lane, and thus having a little
stock of reputation for courage to fall back upon; and also, I daresay,
desirous of proving ourselves superior to men (_videlicet_ Mr Hoggins)
in the article of candour, we began to relate our individual fears, and
the private precautions we each of us took.  I owned that my pet
apprehension was eyes—eyes looking at me, and watching me, glittering
out from some dull, flat, wooden surface; and that if I dared to go up
to my looking-glass when I was panic-stricken, I should certainly turn
it round, with its back towards me, for fear of seeing eyes behind me
looking out of the darkness.  I saw Miss Matty nerving herself up for a
confession; and at last out it came.  She owned that, ever since she had
been a girl, she had dreaded being caught by her last leg, just as she
was getting into bed, by some one concealed under it.  She said, when
she was younger and more active, she used to take a flying leap from a
distance, and so bring both her legs up safely into bed at once; but
that this had always annoyed Deborah, who piqued herself upon getting
into bed gracefully, and she had given it up in consequence.  But now
the old terror would often come over her, especially since Miss Pole’s
house had been attacked (we had got quite to believe in the fact of the
attack having taken place), and yet it was very unpleasant to think of
looking under a bed, and seeing a man concealed, with a great, fierce
face staring out at you; so she had bethought herself of
something—perhaps I had noticed that she had told Martha to buy her a
penny ball, such as children play with—and now she rolled this ball
under the bed every night: if it came out on the other side, well and
good; if not she always took care to have her hand on the bell-rope, and
meant to call out John and Harry, just as if she expected men-servants
to answer her ring.

We all applauded this ingenious contrivance, and Miss Matty sank back
into satisfied silence, with a look at Mrs Forrester as if to ask for
_her_ private weakness.

Mrs Forrester looked askance at Miss Pole, and tried to change the
subject a little by telling us that she had borrowed a boy from one of
the neighbouring cottages and promised his parents a hundredweight of
coals at Christmas, and his supper every evening, for the loan of him at
nights.  She had instructed him in his possible duties when he first
came; and, finding him sensible, she had given him the Major’s sword
(the Major was her late husband), and desired him to put it very
carefully behind his pillow at night, turning the edge towards the head
of the pillow.  He was a sharp lad, she was sure; for, spying out the
Major’s cocked hat, he had said, if he might have that to wear, he was
sure he could frighten two Englishmen, or four Frenchmen any day.  But
she had impressed upon him anew that he was to lose no time in putting
on hats or anything else; but, if he heard any noise, he was to run at
it with his drawn sword.  On my suggesting that some accident might
occur from such slaughterous and indiscriminate directions, and that he
might rush on Jenny getting up to wash, and have spitted her before he
had discovered that she was not a Frenchman, Mrs Forrester said she did
not think that that was likely, for he was a very sound sleeper, and
generally had to be well shaken or cold-pigged in a morning before they
could rouse him.  She sometimes thought such dead sleep must be owing to
the hearty suppers the poor lad ate, for he was half-starved at home,
and she told Jenny to see that he got a good meal at night.

          [Picture: Slaughterous and indiscriminate directions]

Still this was no confession of Mrs Forrester’s peculiar timidity, and
we urged her to tell us what she thought would frighten her more than
anything.  She paused, and stirred the fire, and snuffed the candles,
and then she said, in a sounding whisper—

“Ghosts!”

She looked at Miss Pole, as much as to say, she had declared it, and
would stand by it.  Such a look was a challenge in itself.  Miss Pole
came down upon her with indigestion, spectral illusions, optical
delusions, and a great deal out of Dr Ferrier and Dr Hibbert besides.
Miss Matty had rather a leaning to ghosts, as I have mentioned before,
and what little she did say was all on Mrs Forrester’s side, who,
emboldened by sympathy, protested that ghosts were a part of her
religion; that surely she, the widow of a major in the army, knew what
to be frightened at, and what not; in short, I never saw Mrs Forrester
so warm either before or since, for she was a gentle, meek, enduring old
lady in most things.  Not all the elder-wine that ever was mulled could
this night wash out the remembrance of this difference between Miss Pole
and her hostess.  Indeed, when the elder-wine was brought in, it gave
rise to a new burst of discussion; for Jenny, the little maiden who
staggered under the tray, had to give evidence of having seen a ghost
with her own eyes, not so many nights ago, in Darkness Lane, the very
lane we were to go through on our way home.

In spite of the uncomfortable feeling which this last consideration gave
me, I could not help being amused at Jenny’s position, which was
exceedingly like that of a witness being examined and cross-examined by
two counsel who are not at all scrupulous about asking leading
questions. The conclusion I arrived at was, that Jenny had certainly
seen something beyond what a fit of indigestion would have caused.  A
lady all in white, and without her head, was what she deposed and
adhered to, supported by a consciousness of the secret sympathy of her
mistress under the withering scorn with which Miss Pole regarded her.
And not only she, but many others, had seen this headless lady, who sat
by the roadside wringing her hands as in deep grief.  Mrs Forrester
looked at us from time to time with an air of conscious triumph; but
then she had not to pass through Darkness Lane before she could bury
herself beneath her own familiar bed-clothes.

We preserved a discreet silence as to the headless lady while we were
putting on our things to go home, for there was no knowing how near the
ghostly head and ears might be, or what spiritual connection they might
be keeping up with the unhappy body in Darkness Lane; and, therefore,
even Miss Pole felt that it was as well not to speak lightly on such
subjects, for fear of vexing or insulting that woebegone trunk.  At
least, so I conjecture; for, instead of the busy clatter usual in the
operation, we tied on our cloaks as sadly as mutes at a funeral.  Miss
Matty drew the curtains round the windows of the chair to shut out
disagreeable sights, and the men (either because they were in spirits
that their labours were so nearly ended, or because they were going down
hill), set off at such a round and merry pace, that it was all Miss Pole
and I could do to keep up with them.  She had breath for nothing beyond
an imploring “Don’t leave me!” uttered as she clutched my arm so tightly
that I could not have quitted her, ghost or no ghost.  What a relief it
was when the men, weary of their burden and their quick trot, stopped
just where Headingley Causeway branches off from Darkness Lane!  Miss
Pole unloosed me and caught at one of the men—

“Could not you—could not you take Miss Matty round by Headingley
Causeway?—the pavement in Darkness Lane jolts so, and she is not very
strong.”

A smothered voice was heard from the inside of the chair—

“Oh! pray go on!  What is the matter?  What is the matter?  I will give
you sixpence more to go on very fast; pray don’t stop here.”

“And I’ll give you a shilling,” said Miss Pole, with tremulous dignity,
“if you’ll go by Headingley Causeway.”

The two men grunted acquiescence and took up the chair, and went along
the causeway, which certainly answered Miss Pole’s kind purpose of
saving Miss Matty’s bones; for it was covered with soft, thick mud, and
even a fall there would have been easy till the getting-up came, when
there might have been some difficulty in extrication.




CHAPTER XI.
SAMUEL BROWN


THE next morning I met Lady Glenmire and Miss Pole setting out on a long
walk to find some old woman who was famous in the neighbourhood for her
skill in knitting woollen stockings.  Miss Pole said to me, with a smile
half-kindly and half-contemptuous upon her countenance, “I have been
just telling Lady Glenmire of our poor friend Mrs Forrester, and her
terror of ghosts.  It comes from living so much alone, and listening to
the bug-a-boo stories of that Jenny of hers.”  She was so calm and so
much above superstitious fears herself that I was almost ashamed to say
how glad I had been of her Headingley Causeway proposition the night
before, and turned off the conversation to something else.

In the afternoon Miss Pole called on Miss Matty to tell her of the
adventure—the real adventure they had met with on their morning’s walk.
They had been perplexed about the exact path which they were to take
across the fields in order to find the knitting old woman, and had
stopped to inquire at a little wayside public-house, standing on the
high road to London, about three miles from Cranford.  The good woman
had asked them to sit down and rest themselves while she fetched her
husband, who could direct them better than she could; and, while they
were sitting in the sanded parlour, a little girl came in.  They thought
that she belonged to the landlady, and began some trifling conversation
with her; but, on Mrs Roberts’s return, she told them that the little
thing was the only child of a couple who were staying in the house.  And
then she began a long story, out of which Lady Glenmire and Miss Pole
could only gather one or two decided facts, which were that, about six
weeks ago, a light spring-cart had broken down just before their door,
in which there were two men, one woman, and this child.  One of the men
was seriously hurt—no bones broken, only “shaken,” the landlady called
it; but he had probably sustained some severe internal injury, for he
had languished in their house ever since, attended by his wife, the
mother of this little girl. Miss Pole had asked what he was, what he
looked like.  And Mrs Roberts had made answer that he was not like a
gentleman, nor yet like a common person; if it had not been that he and
his wife were such decent, quiet people, she could almost have thought
he was a mountebank, or something of that kind, for they had a great box
in the cart, full of she did not know what.  She had helped to unpack
it, and take out their linen and clothes, when the other man—his
twin-brother, she believed he was—had gone off with the horse and cart.

Miss Pole had begun to have her suspicions at this point, and expressed
her idea that it was rather strange that the box and cart and horse and
all should have disappeared; but good Mrs Roberts seemed to have become
quite indignant at Miss Pole’s implied suggestion; in fact, Miss Pole
said she was as angry as if Miss Pole had told her that she herself was
a swindler.  As the best way of convincing the ladies, she bethought her
of begging them to see the wife; and, as Miss Pole said, there was no
doubting the honest, worn, bronzed face of the woman, who at the first
tender word from Lady Glenmire, burst into tears, which she was too weak
to check until some word from the landlady made her swallow down her
sobs, in order that she might testify to the Christian kindness shown by
Mr and Mrs Roberts.  Miss Pole came round with a swing to as vehement a
belief in the sorrowful tale as she had been sceptical before; and, as
a proof of this, her energy in the poor sufferer’s behalf was nothing
daunted when she found out that he, and no other, was our Signor
Brunoni, to whom all Cranford had been attributing all manner of evil
this six weeks past!  Yes! his wife said his proper name was Samuel
Brown—“Sam,” she called him—but to the last we preferred calling him
“the Signor”; it sounded so much better.

The end of their conversation with the Signora Brunoni was that it was
agreed that he should be placed under medical advice, and for any
expense incurred in procuring this Lady Glenmire promised to hold
herself responsible, and had accordingly gone to Mr Hoggins to beg him
to ride over to the “Rising Sun” that very afternoon, and examine into
the signor’s real state; and, as Miss Pole said, if it was desirable to
remove him to Cranford to be more immediately under Mr Hoggins’s eye,
she would undertake to see for lodgings and arrange about the rent.  Mrs
Roberts had been as kind as could be all throughout, but it was evident
that their long residence there had been a slight inconvenience.

Before Miss Pole left us, Miss Matty and I were as full of the morning’s
adventure as she was.  We talked about it all the evening, turning it in
every possible light, and we went to bed anxious for the morning, when
we should surely hear from someone what Mr Hoggins thought and
recommended; for, as Miss Matty observed, though Mr Hoggins did say
“Jack’s up,” “a fig for his heels,” and called Preference “Pref.” she
believed he was a very worthy man and a very clever surgeon.  Indeed, we
were rather proud of our doctor at Cranford, as a doctor.  We often
wished, when we heard of Queen Adelaide or the Duke of Wellington being
ill, that they would send for Mr Hoggins; but, on consideration, we were
rather glad they did not, for, if we were ailing, what should we do if
Mr Hoggins had been appointed physician-in-ordinary to the Royal Family?
 As a surgeon we were proud of him; but as a man—or rather, I should
say, as a gentleman—we could only shake our heads over his name and
himself, and wished that he had read Lord Chesterfield’s Letters in the
days when his manners were susceptible of improvement.  Nevertheless, we
all regarded his dictum in the signor’s case as infallible, and when he
said that with care and attention he might rally, we had no more fear
for him.

But, although we had no more fear, everybody did as much as if there was
great cause for anxiety—as indeed there was until Mr Hoggins took charge
of him.  Miss Pole looked out clean and comfortable, if homely,
lodgings; Miss Matty sent the sedan-chair for him, and Martha and I
aired it well before it left Cranford by holding a warming-pan full of
red-hot coals in it, and then shutting it up close, smoke and all, until
the time when he should get into it at the “Rising Sun.”  Lady Glenmire
undertook the medical department under Mr Hoggins’s directions, and
rummaged up all Mrs Jamieson’s medicine glasses, and spoons, and
bed-tables, in a free-and-easy way, that made Miss Matty feel a little
anxious as to what that lady and Mr Mulliner might say, if they knew.
Mrs Forrester made some of the bread-jelly, for which she was so famous,
to have ready as a refreshment in the lodgings when he should arrive.  A
present of this bread-jelly was the highest mark of favour dear Mrs
Forrester could confer.  Miss Pole had once asked her for the receipt,
but she had met with a very decided rebuff; that lady told her that she
could not part with it to any one during her life, and that after her
death it was bequeathed, as her executors would find, to Miss Matty.
What Miss Matty, or, as Mrs Forrester called her (remembering the clause
in her will and the dignity of the occasion), Miss Matilda Jenkyns—might
choose to do with the receipt when it came into her possession—whether
to make it public, or to hand it down as an heirloom—she did not know,
nor would she dictate.  And a mould of this admirable, digestible,
unique bread-jelly was sent by Mrs Forrester to our poor sick conjuror.
Who says that the aristocracy are proud?  Here was a lady by birth a
Tyrrell, and descended from the great Sir Walter that shot King Rufus,
and in whose veins ran the blood of him who murdered the little princes
in the Tower, going every day to see what dainty dishes she could
prepare for Samuel Brown, a mountebank!  But, indeed, it was wonderful
to see what kind feelings were called out by this poor man’s coming
amongst us.  And also wonderful to see how the great Cranford panic,
which had been occasioned by his first coming in his Turkish dress,
melted away into thin air on his second coming—pale and feeble, and with
his heavy, filmy eyes, that only brightened a very little when they fell
upon the countenance of his faithful wife, or their pale and sorrowful
little girl.

Somehow we all forgot to be afraid.  I daresay it was that finding out
that he, who had first excited our love of the marvellous by his
unprecedented arts, had not sufficient every-day gifts to manage a
shying horse, made us feel as if we were ourselves again.  Miss Pole
came with her little basket at all hours of the evening, as if her
lonely house and the unfrequented road to it had never been infested by
that “murderous gang”; Mrs Forrester said she thought that neither Jenny
nor she need mind the headless lady who wept and wailed in Darkness
Lane, for surely the power was never given to such beings to harm those
who went about to try to do what little good was in their power, to
which Jenny tremblingly assented; but the mistress’s theory had little
effect on the maid’s practice until she had sewn two pieces of red
flannel in the shape of a cross on her inner garment.

I found Miss Matty covering her penny ball—the ball that she used to
roll under her bed—with gay-coloured worsted in rainbow stripes.

“My dear,” said she, “my heart is sad for that little careworn child.
Although her father is a conjuror, she looks as if she had never had a
good game of play in her life.  I used to make very pretty balls in this
way when I was a girl, and I thought I would try if I could not make
this one smart and take it to Phoebe this afternoon.  I think ‘the gang’
must have left the neighbourhood, for one does not hear any more of
their violence and robbery now.”

We were all of us far too full of the signor’s precarious state to talk
either about robbers or ghosts.  Indeed, Lady Glenmire said she never
had heard of any actual robberies, except that two little boys had
stolen some apples from Farmer Benson’s orchard, and that some eggs had
been missed on a market-day off Widow Hayward’s stall.  But that was
expecting too much of us; we could not acknowledge that we had only had
this small foundation for all our panic.  Miss Pole drew herself up at
this remark of Lady Glenmire’s, and said “that she wished she could
agree with her as to the very small reason we had had for alarm, but
with the recollection of a man disguised as a woman who had endeavoured
to force himself into her house while his confederates waited outside;
with the knowledge gained from Lady Glenmire herself, of the footprints
seen on Mrs Jamieson’s flower borders; with the fact before her of the
audacious robbery committed on Mr Hoggins at his own door”—But here Lady
Glenmire broke in with a very strong expression of doubt as to whether
this last story was not an entire fabrication founded upon the theft of
a cat; she grew so red while she was saying all this that I was not
surprised at Miss Pole’s manner of bridling up, and I am certain, if
Lady Glenmire had not been “her ladyship,” we should have had a more
emphatic contradiction than the “Well, to be sure!” and similar
fragmentary ejaculations, which were all that she ventured upon in my
lady’s presence.  But when she was gone Miss Pole began a long
congratulation to Miss Matty that so far they had escaped marriage,
which she noticed always made people credulous to the last degree;
indeed, she thought it argued great natural credulity in a woman if she
could not keep herself from being married; and in what Lady Glenmire had
said about Mr Hoggins’s robbery we had a specimen of what people came to
if they gave way to such a weakness; evidently Lady Glenmire would
swallow anything if she could believe the poor vamped-up story about a
neck of mutton and a pussy with which he had tried to impose on Miss
Pole, only she had always been on her guard against believing too much
of what men said.

We were thankful, as Miss Pole desired us to be, that we had never been
married; but I think, of the two, we were even more thankful that the
robbers had left Cranford; at least I judge so from a speech of Miss
Matty’s that evening, as we sat over the fire, in which she evidently
looked upon a husband as a great protector against thieves, burglars,
and ghosts; and said that she did not think that she should dare to be
always warning young people against matrimony, as Miss Pole did
continually; to be sure, marriage was a risk, as she saw, now she had
had some experience; but she remembered the time when she had looked
forward to being married as much as any one.

“Not to any particular person, my dear,” said she, hastily checking
herself up, as if she were afraid of having admitted too much; “only the
old story, you know, of ladies always saying, ‘_When_ I marry,’ and
gentlemen, ‘_If_ I marry.’”  It was a joke spoken in rather a sad tone,
and I doubt if either of us smiled; but I could not see Miss Matty’s
face by the flickering fire-light.  In a little while she continued—

“But, after all, I have not told you the truth.  It is so long ago, and
no one ever knew how much I thought of it at the time, unless, indeed,
my dear mother guessed; but I may say that there was a time when I did
not think I should have been only Miss Matty Jenkyns all my life; for
even if I did meet with any one who wished to marry me now (and, as Miss
Pole says, one is never too safe), I could not take him—I hope he would
not take it too much to heart, but I could _not_ take him—or any one but
the person I once thought I should be married to; and he is dead and
gone, and he never knew how it all came about that I said ‘No,’ when I
had thought many and many a time—Well, it’s no matter what I thought.
God ordains it all, and I am very happy, my dear.  No one has such kind
friends as I,” continued she, taking my hand and holding it in hers.

If I had never known of Mr Holbrook, I could have said something in this
pause, but as I had, I could not think of anything that would come in
naturally, and so we both kept silence for a little time.

“My father once made us,” she began, “keep a diary, in two columns; on
one side we were to put down in the morning what we thought would be the
course and events of the coming day, and at night we were to put down on
the other side what really had happened.  It would be to some people
rather a sad way of telling their lives,” (a tear dropped upon my hand
at these words)—“I don’t mean that mine has been sad, only so very
different to what I expected.  I remember, one winter’s evening, sitting
over our bedroom fire with Deborah—I remember it as if it were
yesterday—and we were planning our future lives, both of us were
planning, though only she talked about it.  She said she should like to
marry an archdeacon, and write his charges; and you know, my dear, she
never was married, and, for aught I know, she never spoke to an
unmarried archdeacon in her life.  I never was ambitious, nor could I
have written charges, but I thought I could manage a house (my mother
used to call me her right hand), and I was always so fond of little
children—the shyest babies would stretch out their little arms to come
to me; when I was a girl, I was half my leisure time nursing in the
neighbouring cottages; but I don’t know how it was, when I grew sad and
grave—which I did a year or two after this time—the little things drew
back from me, and I am afraid I lost the knack, though I am just as fond
of children as ever, and have a strange yearning at my heart whenever I
see a mother with her baby in her arms.  Nay, my dear” (and by a sudden
blaze which sprang up from a fall of the unstirred coals, I saw that her
eyes were full of tears—gazing intently on some vision of what might
have been), “do you know I dream sometimes that I have a little
child—always the same—a little girl of about two years old; she never
grows older, though I have dreamt about her for many years.  I don’t
think I ever dream of any words or sound she makes; she is very
noiseless and still, but she comes to me when she is very sorry or very
glad, and I have wakened with the clasp of her dear little arms round my
neck.  Only last night—perhaps because I had gone to sleep thinking of
this ball for Phoebe—my little darling came in my dream, and put up her
mouth to be kissed, just as I have seen real babies do to real mothers
before going to bed.  But all this is nonsense, dear! only don’t be
frightened by Miss Pole from being married.  I can fancy it may be a
very happy state, and a little credulity helps one on through life very
smoothly—better than always doubting and doubting and seeing
difficulties and disagreeables in everything.”

              [Picture: Would stretch out their little arms]

If I had been inclined to be daunted from matrimony, it would not have
been Miss Pole to do it; it would have been the lot of poor Signor
Brunoni and his wife.  And yet again, it was an encouragement to see
how, through all their cares and sorrows, they thought of each other and
not of themselves; and how keen were their joys, if they only passed
through each other, or through the little Phoebe.

The signora told me, one day, a good deal about their lives up to this
period.  It began by my asking her whether Miss Pole’s story of the
twin-brothers were true; it sounded so wonderful a likeness, that I
should have had my doubts, if Miss Pole had not been unmarried.  But the
signora, or (as we found out she preferred to be called) Mrs Brown, said
it was quite true; that her brother-in-law was by many taken for her
husband, which was of great assistance to them in their profession;
“though,” she continued, “how people can mistake Thomas for the real
Signor Brunoni, I can’t conceive; but he says they do; so I suppose I
must believe him.  Not but what he is a very good man; I am sure I don’t
know how we should have paid our bill at the ‘Rising Sun’ but for the
money he sends; but people must know very little about art if they can
take him for my husband.  Why, Miss, in the ball trick, where my husband
spreads his fingers wide, and throws out his little finger with quite an
air and a grace, Thomas just clumps up his hand like a fist, and might
have ever so many balls hidden in it.  Besides, he has never been in
India, and knows nothing of the proper sit of a turban.”

“Have you been in India?” said I, rather astonished.

“Oh, yes! many a year, ma’am.  Sam was a sergeant in the 31st; and when
the regiment was ordered to India, I drew a lot to go, and I was more
thankful than I can tell; for it seemed as if it would only be a slow
death to me to part from my husband.  But, indeed, ma’am, if I had known
all, I don’t know whether I would not rather have died there and then
than gone through what I have done since.  To be sure, I’ve been able to
comfort Sam, and to be with him; but, ma’am, I’ve lost six children,”
said she, looking up at me with those strange eyes that I’ve never
noticed but in mothers of dead children—with a kind of wild look in
them, as if seeking for what they never more might find.  “Yes!  Six
children died off, like little buds nipped untimely, in that cruel
India.  I thought, as each died, I never could—I never would—love a
child again; and when the next came, it had not only its own love, but
the deeper love that came from the thoughts of its little dead brothers
and sisters.  And when Phoebe was coming, I said to my husband, ‘Sam,
when the child is born, and I am strong, I shall leave you; it will cut
my heart cruel; but if this baby dies too, I shall go mad; the madness
is in me now; but if you let me go down to Calcutta, carrying my baby
step by step, it will, maybe, work itself off; and I will save, and I
will hoard, and I will beg—and I will die, to get a passage home to
England, where our baby may live?’  God bless him! he said I might go;
and he saved up his pay, and I saved every pice I could get for washing
or any way; and when Phoebe came, and I grew strong again, I set off.
It was very lonely; through the thick forests, dark again with their
heavy trees—along by the river’s side (but I had been brought up near
the Avon in Warwickshire, so that flowing noise sounded like home)—from
station to station, from Indian village to village, I went along,
carrying my child.  I had seen one of the officer’s ladies with a little
picture, ma’am—done by a Catholic foreigner, ma’am—of the Virgin and the
little Saviour, ma’am.  She had him on her arm, and her form was softly
curled round him, and their cheeks touched.  Well, when I went to bid
good-bye to this lady, for whom I had washed, she cried sadly; for she,
too, had lost her children, but she had not another to save, like me;
and I was bold enough to ask her would she give me that print.  And she
cried the more, and said her children were with that little blessed
Jesus; and gave it me, and told me that she had heard it had been
painted on the bottom of a cask, which made it have that round shape.
And when my body was very weary, and my heart was sick (for there were
times when I misdoubted if I could ever reach my home, and there were
times when I thought of my husband, and one time when I thought my baby
was dying), I took out that picture and looked at it, till I could have
thought the mother spoke to me, and comforted me.  And the natives were
very kind.  We could not understand one another; but they saw my baby on
my breast, and they came out to me, and brought me rice and milk, and
sometimes flowers—I have got some of the flowers dried.  Then, the next
morning, I was so tired; and they wanted me to stay with them—I could
tell that—and tried to frighten me from going into the deep woods,
which, indeed, looked very strange and dark; but it seemed to me as if
Death was following me to take my baby away from me; and as if I must go
on, and on—and I thought how God had cared for mothers ever since the
world was made, and would care for me; so I bade them good-bye, and set
off afresh.  And once when my baby was ill, and both she and I needed
rest, He led me to a place where I found a kind Englishman lived, right
in the midst of the natives.”

“And you reached Calcutta safely at last?”

“Yes, safely!  Oh! when I knew I had only two days’ journey more before
me, I could not help it, ma’am—it might be idolatry, I cannot tell—but I
was near one of the native temples, and I went into it with my baby to
thank God for His great mercy; for it seemed to me that where others had
prayed before to their God, in their joy or in their agony, was of
itself a sacred place.  And I got as servant to an invalid lady, who
grew quite fond of my baby aboard-ship; and, in two years’ time, Sam
earned his discharge, and came home to me, and to our child.  Then he
had to fix on a trade; but he knew of none; and once, once upon a time,
he had learnt some tricks from an Indian juggler; so he set up
conjuring, and it answered so well that he took Thomas to help him—as
his man, you know, not as another conjuror, though Thomas has set it up
now on his own hook. But it has been a great help to us that likeness
between the twins, and made a good many tricks go off well that they
made up together.  And Thomas is a good brother, only he has not the
fine carriage of my husband, so that I can’t think how he can be taken
for Signor Brunoni himself, as he says he is.”

“Poor little Phoebe!” said I, my thoughts going back to the baby she
carried all those hundred miles.

“Ah! you may say so!  I never thought I should have reared her, though,
when she fell ill at Chunderabaddad; but that good, kind Aga Jenkyns
took us in, which I believe was the very saving of her.”

“Jenkyns!” said I.

“Yes, Jenkyns.  I shall think all people of that name are kind; for here
is that nice old lady who comes every day to take Phoebe a walk!”

But an idea had flashed through my head; could the Aga Jenkyns be the
lost Peter?  True he was reported by many to be dead.  But, equally
true, some had said that he had arrived at the dignity of Great Lama of
Thibet. Miss Matty thought he was alive.  I would make further inquiry.




CHAPTER XII.
ENGAGED TO BE MARRIED


WAS the “poor Peter” of Cranford the Aga Jenkyns of Chunderabaddad, or
was he not?  As somebody says, that was the question.

In my own home, whenever people had nothing else to do, they blamed me
for want of discretion.  Indiscretion was my bug-bear fault.  Everybody
has a bug-bear fault, a sort of standing characteristic—a _pièce de
résistance_ for their friends to cut at; and in general they cut and
come again.  I was tired of being called indiscreet and incautious; and
I determined for once to prove myself a model of prudence and wisdom.  I
would not even hint my suspicions respecting the Aga.  I would collect
evidence and carry it home to lay before my father, as the family friend
of the two Miss Jenkynses.

In my search after facts, I was often reminded of a description my
father had once given of a ladies’ committee that he had had to preside
over. He said he could not help thinking of a passage in Dickens, which
spoke of a chorus in which every man took the tune he knew best, and
sang it to his own satisfaction.  So, at this charitable committee,
every lady took the subject uppermost in her mind, and talked about it
to her own great contentment, but not much to the advancement of the
subject they had met to discuss.  But even that committee could have
been nothing to the Cranford ladies when I attempted to gain some clear
and definite information as to poor Peter’s height, appearance, and when
and where he was seen and heard of last.  For instance, I remember
asking Miss Pole (and I thought the question was very opportune, for I
put it when I met her at a call at Mrs Forrester’s, and both the ladies
had known Peter, and I imagined that they might refresh each other’s
memories)—I asked Miss Pole what was the very last thing they had ever
heard about him; and then she named the absurd report to which I have
alluded, about his having been elected Great Lama of Thibet; and this
was a signal for each lady to go off on her separate idea.  Mrs
Forrester’s start was made on the veiled prophet in Lalla Rookh—whether
I thought he was meant for the Great Lama, though Peter was not so ugly,
indeed rather handsome, if he had not been freckled.  I was thankful to
see her double upon Peter; but, in a moment, the delusive lady was off
upon Rowland’s Kalydor, and the merits of cosmetics and hair oils in
general, and holding forth so fluently that I turned to listen to Miss
Pole, who (through the llamas, the beasts of burden) had got to Peruvian
bonds, and the share market, and her poor opinion of joint-stock banks
in general, and of that one in particular in which Miss Matty’s money
was invested.  In vain I put in “When was it—in what year was it that
you heard that Mr Peter was the Great Lama?”  They only joined issue to
dispute whether llamas were carnivorous animals or not; in which dispute
they were not quite on fair grounds, as Mrs Forrester (after they had
grown warm and cool again) acknowledged that she always confused
carnivorous and graminivorous together, just as she did horizontal and
perpendicular; but then she apologised for it very prettily, by saying
that in her day the only use people made of four-syllabled words was to
teach how they should be spelt.

The only fact I gained from this conversation was that certainly Peter
had last been heard of in India, “or that neighbourhood”; and that this
scanty intelligence of his whereabouts had reached Cranford in the year
when Miss Pole had brought her Indian muslin gown, long since worn out
(we washed it and mended it, and traced its decline and fall into a
window-blind before we could go on); and in a year when Wombwell came to
Cranford, because Miss Matty had wanted to see an elephant in order that
she might the better imagine Peter riding on one; and had seen a
boa-constrictor too, which was more than she wished to imagine in her
fancy-pictures of Peter’s locality; and in a year when Miss Jenkyns had
learnt some piece of poetry off by heart, and used to say, at all the
Cranford parties, how Peter was “surveying mankind from China to Peru,”
which everybody had thought very grand, and rather appropriate, because
India was between China and Peru, if you took care to turn the globe to
the left instead of the right.

I suppose all these inquiries of mine, and the consequent curiosity
excited in the minds of my friends, made us blind and deaf to what was
going on around us.  It seemed to me as if the sun rose and shone, and
as if the rain rained on Cranford, just as usual, and I did not notice
any sign of the times that could be considered as a prognostic of any
uncommon event; and, to the best of my belief, not only Miss Matty and
Mrs Forrester, but even Miss Pole herself, whom we looked upon as a kind
of prophetess, from the knack she had of foreseeing things before they
came to pass—although she did not like to disturb her friends by telling
them her foreknowledge—even Miss Pole herself was breathless with
astonishment when she came to tell us of the astounding piece of news.
But I must recover myself; the contemplation of it, even at this
distance of time, has taken away my breath and my grammar, and unless I
subdue my emotion, my spelling will go too.

We were sitting—Miss Matty and I—much as usual, she in the blue chintz
easy-chair, with her back to the light, and her knitting in her hand, I
reading aloud the _St James’s Chronicle_.  A few minutes more, and we
should have gone to make the little alterations in dress usual before
calling-time (twelve o’clock) in Cranford.  I remember the scene and the
date well.  We had been talking of the signor’s rapid recovery since
the warmer weather had set in, and praising Mr Hoggins’s skill, and
lamenting his want of refinement and manner (it seems a curious
coincidence that this should have been our subject, but so it was), when
a knock was heard—a caller’s knock—three distinct taps—and we were
flying (that is to say, Miss Matty could not walk very fast, having had
a touch of rheumatism) to our rooms, to change cap and collars, when
Miss Pole arrested us by calling out, as she came up the stairs, “Don’t
go—I can’t wait—it is not twelve, I know—but never mind your dress—I
must speak to you.”  We did our best to look as if it was not we who had
made the hurried movement, the sound of which she had heard; for, of
course, we did not like to have it supposed that we had any old clothes
that it was convenient to wear out in the “sanctuary of home,” as Miss
Jenkyns once prettily called the back parlour, where she was tying up
preserves.  So we threw our gentility with double force into our
manners, and very genteel we were for two minutes while Miss Pole
recovered breath, and excited our curiosity strongly by lifting up her
hands in amazement, and bringing them down in silence, as if what she
had to say was too big for words, and could only be expressed by
pantomime.

“What do you think, Miss Matty?  What _do_ you think?  Lady Glenmire is
to marry—is to be married, I mean—Lady Glenmire—Mr Hoggins—Mr Hoggins is
going to marry Lady Glenmire!”

“Marry!” said we.  “Marry!  Madness!”

                 [Picture: What do you think, Miss Matty]

“Marry!” said Miss Pole, with the decision that belonged to her
character.  “_I_ said marry! as you do; and I also said, ‘What a fool my
lady is going to make of herself!’  I could have said ‘Madness!’ but I
controlled myself, for it was in a public shop that I heard of it.
Where feminine delicacy is gone to, I don’t know!  You and I, Miss
Matty, would have been ashamed to have known that our marriage was
spoken of in a grocer’s shop, in the hearing of shopmen!”

“But,” said Miss Matty, sighing as one recovering from a blow, “perhaps
it is not true.  Perhaps we are doing her injustice.”

“No,” said Miss Pole.  “I have taken care to ascertain that.  I went
straight to Mrs Fitz-Adam, to borrow a cookery-book which I knew she
had; and I introduced my congratulations _à propos_ of the difficulty
gentlemen must have in house-keeping; and Mrs Fitz-Adam bridled up, and
said that she believed it was true, though how and where I could have
heard it she did not know.  She said her brother and Lady Glenmire had
come to an understanding at last.  ‘Understanding!’ such a coarse word!
But my lady will have to come down to many a want of refinement.  I have
reason to believe Mr Hoggins sups on bread-and-cheese and beer every
night.

“Marry!” said Miss Matty once again.  “Well!  I never thought of it.
Two people that we know going to be married.  It’s coming very near!”

“So near that my heart stopped beating when I heard of it, while you
might have counted twelve,” said Miss Pole.

“One does not know whose turn may come next.  Here, in Cranford, poor
Lady Glenmire might have thought herself safe,” said Miss Matty, with a
gentle pity in her tones.

“Bah!” said Miss Pole, with a toss of her head.  “Don’t you remember
poor dear Captain Brown’s song ‘Tibbie Fowler,’ and the line—

    ‘Set her on the Tintock tap,
    The wind will blaw a man till her.’”

“That was because ‘Tibbie Fowler’ was rich, I think.”

“Well! there was a kind of attraction about Lady Glenmire that I, for
one, should be ashamed to have.”

I put in my wonder.  “But how can she have fancied Mr Hoggins?  I am not
surprised that Mr Hoggins has liked her.”

“Oh!  I don’t know.  Mr Hoggins is rich, and very pleasant-looking,”
said Miss Matty, “and very good-tempered and kind-hearted.”

“She has married for an establishment, that’s it.  I suppose she takes
the surgery with it,” said Miss Pole, with a little dry laugh at her own
joke.  But, like many people who think they have made a severe and
sarcastic speech, which yet is clever of its kind, she began to relax in
her grimness from the moment when she made this allusion to the surgery;
and we turned to speculate on the way in which Mrs Jamieson would
receive the news.  The person whom she had left in charge of her house
to keep off followers from her maids to set up a follower of her own!
And that follower a man whom Mrs Jamieson had tabooed as vulgar, and
inadmissible to Cranford society, not merely on account of his name, but
because of his voice, his complexion, his boots, smelling of the stable,
and himself, smelling of drugs.  Had he ever been to see Lady Glenmire
at Mrs Jamieson’s?  Chloride of lime would not purify the house in its
owner’s estimation if he had.  Or had their interviews been confined to
the occasional meetings in the chamber of the poor sick conjuror, to
whom, with all our sense of the _mésalliance_, we could not help
allowing that they had both been exceedingly kind?  And now it turned
out that a servant of Mrs Jamieson’s had been ill, and Mr Hoggins had
been attending her for some weeks.  So the wolf had got into the fold,
and now he was carrying off the shepherdess.  What would Mrs Jamieson
say?  We looked into the darkness of futurity as a child gazes after a
rocket up in the cloudy sky, full of wondering expectation of the
rattle, the discharge, and the brilliant shower of sparks and light.
Then we brought ourselves down to earth and the present time by
questioning each other (being all equally ignorant, and all equally
without the slightest data to build any conclusions upon) as to when IT
would take place?  Where?  How much a year Mr Hoggins had?  Whether she
would drop her title?  And how Martha and the other correct servants in
Cranford would ever be brought to announce a married couple as Lady
Glenmire and Mr Hoggins?  But would they be visited?  Would Mrs Jamieson
let us?  Or must we choose between the Honourable Mrs Jamieson and the
degraded Lady Glenmire?  We all liked Lady Glenmire the best.  She was
bright, and kind, and sociable, and agreeable; and Mrs Jamieson was
dull, and inert, and pompous, and tiresome.  But we had acknowledged the
sway of the latter so long, that it seemed like a kind of disloyalty now
even to meditate disobedience to the prohibition we anticipated.

Mrs Forrester surprised us in our darned caps and patched collars; and
we forgot all about them in our eagerness to see how she would bear the
information, which we honourably left to Miss Pole, to impart, although,
if we had been inclined to take unfair advantage, we might have rushed
in ourselves, for she had a most out-of-place fit of coughing for five
minutes after Mrs Forrester entered the room.  I shall never forget the
imploring expression of her eyes, as she looked at us over her
pocket-handkerchief.  They said, as plain as words could speak, “Don’t
let Nature deprive me of the treasure which is mine, although for a time
I can make no use of it.”  And we did not.

Mrs Forrester’s surprise was equal to ours; and her sense of injury
rather greater, because she had to feel for her Order, and saw more
fully than we could do how such conduct brought stains on the
aristocracy.

When she and Miss Pole left us we endeavoured to subside into calmness;
but Miss Matty was really upset by the intelligence she had heard.  She
reckoned it up, and it was more than fifteen years since she had heard
of any of her acquaintance going to be married, with the one exception
of Miss Jessie Brown; and, as she said, it gave her quite a shock, and
made her feel as if she could not think what would happen next.

I don’t know whether it is a fancy of mine, or a real fact, but I have
noticed that, just after the announcement of an engagement in any set,
the unmarried ladies in that set flutter out in an unusual gaiety and
newness of dress, as much as to say, in a tacit and unconscious manner,
“We also are spinsters.”  Miss Matty and Miss Pole talked and thought
more about bonnets, gowns, caps, and shawls, during the fortnight that
succeeded this call, than I had known them do for years before.  But it
might be the spring weather, for it was a warm and pleasant March; and
merinoes and beavers, and woollen materials of all sorts were but
ungracious receptacles of the bright sun’s glancing rays.  It had not
been Lady Glenmire’s dress that had won Mr Hoggins’s heart, for she went
about on her errands of kindness more shabby than ever.  Although in the
hurried glimpses I caught of her at church or elsewhere she appeared
rather to shun meeting any of her friends, her face seemed to have
almost something of the flush of youth in it; her lips looked redder and
more trembling full than in their old compressed state, and her eyes
dwelt on all things with a lingering light, as if she was learning to
love Cranford and its belongings.  Mr Hoggins looked broad and radiant,
and creaked up the middle aisle at church in a brand-new pair of
top-boots—an audible, as well as visible, sign of his purposed change of
state; for the tradition went, that the boots he had worn till now were
the identical pair in which he first set out on his rounds in Cranford
twenty-five years ago; only they had been new-pieced, high and low, top
and bottom, heel and sole, black leather and brown leather, more times
than any one could tell.

None of the ladies in Cranford chose to sanction the marriage by
congratulating either of the parties.  We wished to ignore the whole
affair until our liege lady, Mrs Jamieson, returned.  Till she came back
to give us our cue, we felt that it would be better to consider the
engagement in the same light as the Queen of Spain’s legs—facts which
certainly existed, but the less said about the better.  This restraint
upon our tongues—for you see if we did not speak about it to any of the
parties concerned, how could we get answers to the questions that we
longed to ask?—was beginning to be irksome, and our idea of the dignity
of silence was paling before our curiosity, when another direction was
given to our thoughts, by an announcement on the part of the principal
shopkeeper of Cranford, who ranged the trades from grocer and
cheesemonger to man-milliner, as occasion required, that the spring
fashions were arrived, and would be exhibited on the following Tuesday
at his rooms in High Street.  Now Miss Matty had been only waiting for
this before buying herself a new silk gown.  I had offered, it is true,
to send to Drumble for patterns, but she had rejected my proposal,
gently implying that she had not forgotten her disappointment about the
sea-green turban.  I was thankful that I was on the spot now, to
counteract the dazzling fascination of any yellow or scarlet silk.

I must say a word or two here about myself.  I have spoken of my
father’s old friendship for the Jenkyns family; indeed, I am not sure if
there was not some distant relationship.  He had willingly allowed me to
remain all the winter at Cranford, in consideration of a letter which
Miss Matty had written to him about the time of the panic, in which I
suspect she had exaggerated my powers and my bravery as a defender of
the house.  But now that the days were longer and more cheerful, he was
beginning to urge the necessity of my return; and I only delayed in a
sort of odd forlorn hope that if I could obtain any clear information, I
might make the account given by the signora of the Aga Jenkyns tally
with that of “poor Peter,” his appearance and disappearance, which I had
winnowed out of the conversation of Miss Pole and Mrs Forrester.




CHAPTER XIII.
STOPPED PAYMENT


THE very Tuesday morning on which Mr Johnson was going to show the
fashions, the post-woman brought two letters to the house.  I say the
post-woman, but I should say the postman’s wife.  He was a lame
shoemaker, a very clean, honest man, much respected in the town; but he
never brought the letters round except on unusual occasions, such as
Christmas Day or Good Friday; and on those days the letters, which
should have been delivered at eight in the morning, did not make their
appearance until two or three in the afternoon, for every one liked poor
Thomas, and gave him a welcome on these festive occasions.  He used to
say, “He was welly stawed wi’ eating, for there were three or four
houses where nowt would serve ’em but he must share in their breakfast;”
and by the time he had done his last breakfast, he came to some other
friend who was beginning dinner; but come what might in the way of
temptation, Tom was always sober, civil, and smiling; and, as Miss
Jenkyns used to say, it was a lesson in patience, that she doubted not
would call out that precious quality in some minds, where, but for
Thomas, it might have lain dormant and undiscovered.  Patience was
certainly very dormant in Miss Jenkyns’s mind.  She was always expecting
letters, and always drumming on the table till the post-woman had called
or gone past.  On Christmas Day and Good Friday she drummed from
breakfast till church, from church-time till two o’clock—unless when the
fire wanted stirring, when she invariably knocked down the fire-irons,
and scolded Miss Matty for it. But equally certain was the hearty
welcome and the good dinner for Thomas; Miss Jenkyns standing over him
like a bold dragoon, questioning him as to his children—what they were
doing—what school they went to; upbraiding him if another was likely to
make its appearance, but sending even the little babies the shilling and
the mince-pie which was her gift to all the children, with half-a-crown
in addition for both father and mother.  The post was not half of so
much consequence to dear Miss Matty; but not for the world would she
have diminished Thomas’s welcome and his dole, though I could see that
she felt rather shy over the ceremony, which had been regarded by Miss
Jenkyns as a glorious opportunity for giving advice and benefiting her
fellow-creatures.  Miss Matty would steal the money all in a lump into
his hand, as if she were ashamed of herself.  Miss Jenkyns gave him each
individual coin separate, with a “There! that’s for yourself; that’s for
Jenny,” etc.  Miss Matty would even beckon Martha out of the kitchen
while he ate his food: and once, to my knowledge, winked at its rapid
disappearance into a blue cotton pocket-handkerchief.  Miss Jenkyns
almost scolded him if he did not leave a clean plate, however heaped it
might have been, and gave an injunction with every mouthful.

             [Picture: Standing over him like a bold dragoon]

I have wandered a long way from the two letters that awaited us on the
breakfast-table that Tuesday morning.  Mine was from my father.  Miss
Matty’s was printed.  My father’s was just a man’s letter; I mean it was
very dull, and gave no information beyond that he was well, that they
had had a good deal of rain, that trade was very stagnant, and there
were many disagreeable rumours afloat.  He then asked me if I knew
whether Miss Matty still retained her shares in the Town and County
Bank, as there were very unpleasant reports about it; though nothing
more than he had always foreseen, and had prophesied to Miss Jenkyns
years ago, when she would invest their little property in it—the only
unwise step that clever woman had ever taken, to his knowledge (the only
time she ever acted against his advice, I knew).  However, if anything
had gone wrong, of course I was not to think of leaving Miss Matty while
I could be of any use, etc.

“Who is your letter from, my dear?  Mine is a very civil invitation,
signed ‘Edwin Wilson,’ asking me to attend an important meeting of the
shareholders of the Town and County Bank, to be held in Drumble, on
Thursday the twenty-first.  I am sure, it is very attentive of them to
remember me.”

I did not like to hear of this “important meeting,” for, though I did
not know much about business, I feared it confirmed what my father said:
however, I thought, ill news always came fast enough, so I resolved to
say nothing about my alarm, and merely told her that my father was well,
and sent his kind regards to her.  She kept turning over and admiring
her letter.  At last she spoke—

“I remember their sending one to Deborah just like this; but that I did
not wonder at, for everybody knew she was so clear-headed.  I am afraid
I could not help them much; indeed, if they came to accounts, I should
be quite in the way, for I never could do sums in my head.  Deborah, I
know, rather wished to go, and went so far as to order a new bonnet for
the occasion: but when the time came she had a bad cold; so they sent
her a very polite account of what they had done.  Chosen a director, I
think it was.  Do you think they want me to help them to choose a
director?  I am sure I should choose your father at once!”

“My father has no shares in the bank,” said I.

“Oh, no!  I remember.  He objected very much to Deborah’s buying any, I
believe.  But she was quite the woman of business, and always judged for
herself; and here, you see, they have paid eight per cent. all these
years.”

It was a very uncomfortable subject to me, with my half-knowledge; so I
thought I would change the conversation, and I asked at what time she
thought we had better go and see the fashions.  “Well, my dear,” she
said, “the thing is this: it is not etiquette to go till after twelve;
but then, you see, all Cranford will be there, and one does not like to
be too curious about dress and trimmings and caps with all the world
looking on.  It is never genteel to be over-curious on these occasions.
Deborah had the knack of always looking as if the latest fashion was
nothing new to her; a manner she had caught from Lady Arley, who did see
all the new modes in London, you know.  So I thought we would just slip
down—for I do want this morning, soon after breakfast half-a-pound of
tea—and then we could go up and examine the things at our leisure, and
see exactly how my new silk gown must be made; and then, after twelve,
we could go with our minds disengaged, and free from thoughts of dress.”

We began to talk of Miss Matty’s new silk gown.  I discovered that it
would be really the first time in her life that she had had to choose
anything of consequence for herself: for Miss Jenkyns had always been
the more decided character, whatever her taste might have been; and it
is astonishing how such people carry the world before them by the mere
force of will.  Miss Matty anticipated the sight of the glossy folds
with as much delight as if the five sovereigns, set apart for the
purchase, could buy all the silks in the shop; and (remembering my own
loss of two hours in a toyshop before I could tell on what wonder to
spend a silver threepence) I was very glad that we were going early,
that dear Miss Matty might have leisure for the delights of perplexity.

If a happy sea-green could be met with, the gown was to be sea-green: if
not, she inclined to maize, and I to silver gray; and we discussed the
requisite number of breadths until we arrived at the shop-door.  We were
to buy the tea, select the silk, and then clamber up the iron corkscrew
stairs that led into what was once a loft, though now a fashion
show-room.

The young men at Mr Johnson’s had on their best looks; and their best
cravats, and pivoted themselves over the counter with surprising
activity.  They wanted to show us upstairs at once; but on the principle
of business first and pleasure afterwards, we stayed to purchase the
tea. Here Miss Matty’s absence of mind betrayed itself.  If she was
made aware that she had been drinking green tea at any time, she always
thought it her duty to lie awake half through the night afterward (I
have known her take it in ignorance many a time without such effects),
and consequently green tea was prohibited the house; yet to-day she
herself asked for the obnoxious article, under the impression that she
was talking about the silk.  However, the mistake was soon rectified;
and then the silks were unrolled in good truth.  By this time the shop
was pretty well filled, for it was Cranford market-day, and many of the
farmers and country people from the neighbourhood round came in,
sleeking down their hair, and glancing shyly about, from under their
eyelids, as anxious to take back some notion of the unusual gaiety to
the mistress or the lasses at home, and yet feeling that they were out
of place among the smart shopmen and gay shawls and summer prints.  One
honest-looking man, however, made his way up to the counter at which we
stood, and boldly asked to look at a shawl or two.  The other country
folk confined themselves to the grocery side; but our neighbour was
evidently too full of some kind intention towards mistress, wife or
daughter, to be shy; and it soon became a question with me, whether he
or Miss Matty would keep their shopmen the longest time.  He thought
each shawl more beautiful than the last; and, as for Miss Matty, she
smiled and sighed over each fresh bale that was brought out; one colour
set off another, and the heap together would, as she said, make even the
rainbow look poor.

“I am afraid,” said she, hesitating, “Whichever I choose I shall wish I
had taken another.  Look at this lovely crimson! it would be so warm in
winter.  But spring is coming on, you know.  I wish I could have a gown
for every season,” said she, dropping her voice—as we all did in
Cranford whenever we talked of anything we wished for but could not
afford. “However,” she continued in a louder and more cheerful tone, “it
would give me a great deal of trouble to take care of them if I had
them; so, I think, I’ll only take one.  But which must it be, my dear?”

And now she hovered over a lilac with yellow spots, while I pulled out a
quiet sage-green that had faded into insignificance under the more
brilliant colours, but which was nevertheless a good silk in its humble
way.  Our attention was called off to our neighbour.  He had chosen a
shawl of about thirty shillings’ value; and his face looked broadly
happy, under the anticipation, no doubt, of the pleasant surprise he
would give to some Molly or Jenny at home; he had tugged a leathern
purse out of his breeches-pocket, and had offered a five-pound note in
payment for the shawl, and for some parcels which had been brought round
to him from the grocery counter; and it was just at this point that he
attracted our notice.  The shopman was examining the note with a
puzzled, doubtful air.

“Town and County Bank!  I am not sure, sir, but I believe we have
received a warning against notes issued by this bank only this morning.
I will just step and ask Mr Johnson, sir; but I’m afraid I must trouble
you for payment in cash, or in a note of a different bank.”

I never saw a man’s countenance fall so suddenly into dismay and
bewilderment.  It was almost piteous to see the rapid change.

“Dang it!” said he, striking his fist down on the table, as if to try
which was the harder, “the chap talks as if notes and gold were to be
had for the picking up.”

Miss Matty had forgotten her silk gown in her interest for the man.  I
don’t think she had caught the name of the bank, and in my nervous
cowardice I was anxious that she should not; and so I began admiring the
yellow-spotted lilac gown that I had been utterly condemning only a
minute before.  But it was of no use.

“What bank was it?  I mean, what bank did your note belong to?”

“Town and County Bank.”

“Let me see it,” said she quietly to the shopman, gently taking it out
of his hand, as he brought it back to return it to the farmer.

Mr Johnson was very sorry, but, from information he had received, the
notes issued by that bank were little better than waste paper.

“I don’t understand it,” said Miss Matty to me in a low voice.  “That is
our bank, is it not?—the Town and County Bank?”

“Yes,” said I.  “This lilac silk will just match the ribbons in your new
cap, I believe,” I continued, holding up the folds so as to catch the
light, and wishing that the man would make haste and be gone, and yet
having a new wonder, that had only just sprung up, how far it was wise
or right in me to allow Miss Matty to make this expensive purchase, if
the affairs of the bank were really so bad as the refusal of the note
implied.

But Miss Matty put on the soft dignified manner, peculiar to her, rarely
used, and yet which became her so well, and laying her hand gently on
mine, she said—

“Never mind the silks for a few minutes, dear.  I don’t understand you,
sir,” turning now to the shopman, who had been attending to the farmer.
“Is this a forged note?”

“Oh, no, ma’am.  It is a true note of its kind; but you see, ma’am, it
is a joint-stock bank, and there are reports out that it is likely to
break. Mr Johnson is only doing his duty, ma’am, as I am sure Mr Dobson
knows.”

But Mr Dobson could not respond to the appealing bow by any answering
smile.  He was turning the note absently over in his fingers, looking
gloomily enough at the parcel containing the lately-chosen shawl.

“It’s hard upon a poor man,” said he, “as earns every farthing with the
sweat of his brow.  However, there’s no help for it.  You must take back
your shawl, my man; Lizzle must go on with her cloak for a while.  And
yon figs for the little ones—I promised them to ’em—I’ll take them; but
the ’bacco, and the other things”—

“I will give you five sovereigns for your note, my good man,” said Miss
Matty.  “I think there is some great mistake about it, for I am one of
the shareholders, and I’m sure they would have told me if things had not
been going on right.”

The shopman whispered a word or two across the table to Miss Matty.  She
looked at him with a dubious air.

“Perhaps so,” said she.  “But I don’t pretend to understand business; I
only know that if it is going to fail, and if honest people are to lose
their money because they have taken our notes—I can’t explain myself,”
said she, suddenly becoming aware that she had got into a long sentence
with four people for audience; “only I would rather exchange my gold for
the note, if you please,” turning to the farmer, “and then you can take
your wife the shawl.  It is only going without my gown a few days
longer,” she continued, speaking to me.  “Then, I have no doubt,
everything will be cleared up.”

“But if it is cleared up the wrong way?” said I.

“Why, then it will only have been common honesty in me, as a
shareholder, to have given this good man the money.  I am quite clear
about it in my own mind; but, you know, I can never speak quite as
comprehensibly as others can, only you must give me your note, Mr
Dobson, if you please, and go on with your purchases with these
sovereigns.”

     [Picture: You must give me your note, Mr Dobson, if you please]

The man looked at her with silent gratitude—too awkward to put his
thanks into words; but he hung back for a minute or two, fumbling with
his note.

“I’m loth to make another one lose instead of me, if it is a loss; but,
you see, five pounds is a deal of money to a man with a family; and, as
you say, ten to one in a day or two the note will be as good as gold
again.”

“No hope of that, my friend,” said the shopman.

“The more reason why I should take it,” said Miss Matty quietly.  She
pushed her sovereigns towards the man, who slowly laid his note down in
exchange.  “Thank you.  I will wait a day or two before I purchase any
of these silks; perhaps you will then have a greater choice.  My dear,
will you come upstairs?”

We inspected the fashions with as minute and curious an interest as if
the gown to be made after them had been bought.  I could not see that
the little event in the shop below had in the least damped Miss Matty’s
curiosity as to the make of sleeves or the sit of skirts.  She once or
twice exchanged congratulations with me on our private and leisurely
view of the bonnets and shawls; but I was, all the time, not so sure
that our examination was so utterly private, for I caught glimpses of a
figure dodging behind the cloaks and mantles; and, by a dexterous move,
I came face to face with Miss Pole, also in morning costume (the
principal feature of which was her being without teeth, and wearing a
veil to conceal the deficiency), come on the same errand as ourselves.
But she quickly took her departure, because, as she said, she had a bad
headache, and did not feel herself up to conversation.

As we came down through the shop, the civil Mr Johnson was awaiting us;
he had been informed of the exchange of the note for gold, and with much
good feeling and real kindness, but with a little want of tact, he
wished to condole with Miss Matty, and impress upon her the true state
of the case.  I could only hope that he had heard an exaggerated rumour
for he said that her shares were worse than nothing, and that the bank
could not pay a shilling in the pound.  I was glad that Miss Matty
seemed still a little incredulous; but I could not tell how much of this
was real or assumed, with that self-control which seemed habitual to
ladies of Miss Matty’s standing in Cranford, who would have thought
their dignity compromised by the slightest expression of surprise,
dismay, or any similar feeling to an inferior in station, or in a public
shop.  However, we walked home very silently.  I am ashamed to say, I
believe I was rather vexed and annoyed at Miss Matty’s conduct in taking
the note to herself so decidedly.  I had so set my heart upon her having
a new silk gown, which she wanted sadly; in general she was so undecided
anybody might turn her round; in this case I had felt that it was no use
attempting it, but I was not the less put out at the result.

Somehow, after twelve o’clock, we both acknowledged to a sated curiosity
about the fashions, and to a certain fatigue of body (which was, in
fact, depression of mind) that indisposed us to go out again.  But still
we never spoke of the note; till, all at once, something possessed me to
ask Miss Matty if she would think it her duty to offer sovereigns for
all the notes of the Town and County Bank she met with?  I could have
bitten my tongue out the minute I had said it.  She looked up rather
sadly, and as if I had thrown a new perplexity into her already
distressed mind; and for a minute or two she did not speak.  Then she
said—my own dear Miss Matty—without a shade of reproach in her voice—

“My dear, I never feel as if my mind was what people call very strong;
and it’s often hard enough work for me to settle what I ought to do with
the case right before me.  I was very thankful to—I was very thankful,
that I saw my duty this morning, with the poor man standing by me; but
its rather a strain upon me to keep thinking and thinking what I should
do if such and such a thing happened; and, I believe, I had rather wait
and see what really does come; and I don’t doubt I shall be helped then
if I don’t fidget myself, and get too anxious beforehand.  You know,
love, I’m not like Deborah.  If Deborah had lived, I’ve no doubt she
would have seen after them, before they had got themselves into this
state.”

We had neither of us much appetite for dinner, though we tried to talk
cheerfully about indifferent things.  When we returned into the
drawing-room, Miss Matty unlocked her desk and began to look over her
account-books.  I was so penitent for what I had said in the morning,
that I did not choose to take upon myself the presumption to suppose
that I could assist her; I rather left her alone, as, with puzzled brow,
her eye followed her pen up and down the ruled page.  By-and-by she shut
the book, locked the desk, and came and drew a chair to mine, where I
sat in moody sorrow over the fire.  I stole my hand into hers; she
clasped it, but did not speak a word.  At last she said, with forced
composure in her voice, “If that bank goes wrong, I shall lose one
hundred and forty-nine pounds thirteen shillings and fourpence a year; I
shall only have thirteen pounds a year left.”  I squeezed her hand hard
and tight.  I did not know what to say.  Presently (it was too dark to
see her face) I felt her fingers work convulsively in my grasp; and I
knew she was going to speak again.  I heard the sobs in her voice as she
said, “I hope it’s not wrong—not wicked—but, oh!  I am so glad poor
Deborah is spared this.  She could not have borne to come down in the
world—she had such a noble, lofty spirit.”

This was all she said about the sister who had insisted upon investing
their little property in that unlucky bank.  We were later in lighting
the candle than usual that night, and until that light shamed us into
speaking, we sat together very silently and sadly.

However, we took to our work after tea with a kind of forced
cheerfulness (which soon became real as far as it went), talking of that
never-ending wonder, Lady Glenmire’s engagement.  Miss Matty was almost
coming round to think it a good thing.

“I don’t mean to deny that men are troublesome in a house.  I don’t
judge from my own experience, for my father was neatness itself, and
wiped his shoes on coming in as carefully as any woman; but still a man
has a sort of knowledge of what should be done in difficulties, that it
is very pleasant to have one at hand ready to lean upon.  Now, Lady
Glenmire, instead of being tossed about, and wondering where she is to
settle, will be certain of a home among pleasant and kind people, such
as our good Miss Pole and Mrs Forrester.  And Mr Hoggins is really a
very personable man; and as for his manners, why, if they are not very
polished, I have known people with very good hearts and very clever
minds too, who were not what some people reckoned refined, but who were
both true and tender.”

She fell off into a soft reverie about Mr Holbrook, and I did not
interrupt her, I was so busy maturing a plan I had had in my mind for
some days, but which this threatened failure of the bank had brought to
a crisis.  That night, after Miss Matty went to bed, I treacherously
lighted the candle again, and sat down in the drawing-room to compose a
letter to the Aga Jenkyns, a letter which should affect him if he were
Peter, and yet seem a mere statement of dry facts if he were a stranger.
The church clock pealed out two before I had done.

The next morning news came, both official and otherwise, that the Town
and County Bank had stopped payment.  Miss Matty was ruined.

She tried to speak quietly to me; but when she came to the actual fact
that she would have but about five shillings a week to live upon, she
could not restrain a few tears.

“I am not crying for myself, dear,” said she, wiping them away; “I
believe I am crying for the very silly thought of how my mother would
grieve if she could know; she always cared for us so much more than for
herself.  But many a poor person has less, and I am not very
extravagant, and, thank God, when the neck of mutton, and Martha’s
wages, and the rent are paid, I have not a farthing owing.  Poor Martha!
 I think she’ll be sorry to leave me.”

Miss Matty smiled at me through her tears, and she would fain have had
me see only the smile, not the tears.




CHAPTER XIV.
FRIENDS IN NEED


IT was an example to me, and I fancy it might be to many others, to see
how immediately Miss Matty set about the retrenchment which she knew to
be right under her altered circumstances.  While she went down to speak
to Martha, and break the intelligence to her, I stole out with my letter
to the Aga Jenkyns, and went to the signor’s lodgings to obtain the
exact address.  I bound the signora to secrecy; and indeed her military
manners had a degree of shortness and reserve in them which made her
always say as little as possible, except when under the pressure of
strong excitement.  Moreover (which made my secret doubly sure), the
signor was now so far recovered as to be looking forward to travelling
and conjuring again in the space of a few days, when he, his wife, and
little Phoebe would leave Cranford.  Indeed, I found him looking over a
great black and red placard, in which the Signor Brunoni’s
accomplishments were set forth, and to which only the name of the town
where he would next display them was wanting.  He and his wife were so
much absorbed in deciding where the red letters would come in with most
effect (it might have been the Rubric for that matter), that it was some
time before I could get my question asked privately, and not before I
had given several decisions, the which I questioned afterwards with
equal wisdom of sincerity as soon as the signor threw in his doubts and
reasons on the important subject. At last I got the address, spelt by
sound, and very queer it looked.  I dropped it in the post on my way
home, and then for a minute I stood looking at the wooden pane with a
gaping slit which divided me from the letter but a moment ago in my
hand.  It was gone from me like life, never to be recalled.  It would
get tossed about on the sea, and stained with sea-waves perhaps, and be
carried among palm-trees, and scented with all tropical fragrance; the
little piece of paper, but an hour ago so familiar and commonplace, had
set out on its race to the strange wild countries beyond the Ganges!
But I could not afford to lose much time on this speculation.  I
hastened home, that Miss Matty might not miss me. Martha opened the door
to me, her face swollen with crying.  As soon as she saw me she burst
out afresh, and taking hold of my arm she pulled me in, and banged the
door to, in order to ask me if indeed it was all true that Miss Matty
had been saying.

“I’ll never leave her!  No; I won’t.  I telled her so, and said I could
not think how she could find in her heart to give me warning.  I could
not have had the face to do it, if I’d been her.  I might ha’ been just
as good for nothing as Mrs Fitz-Adam’s Rosy, who struck for wages after
living seven years and a half in one place.  I said I was not one to go
and serve Mammon at that rate; that I knew when I’d got a good missus,
if she didn’t know when she’d got a good servant”—

“But, Martha,” said I, cutting in while she wiped her eyes.

“Don’t, ‘but Martha’ me,” she replied to my deprecatory tone.

“Listen to reason”—

“I’ll not listen to reason,” she said, now in full possession of her
voice, which had been rather choked with sobbing.  “Reason always means
what someone else has got to say.  Now I think what I’ve got to say is
good enough reason; but reason or not, I’ll say it, and I’ll stick to
it. I’ve money in the Savings Bank, and I’ve a good stock of clothes,
and I’m not going to leave Miss Matty.  No, not if she gives me warning
every hour in the day!”

She put her arms akimbo, as much as to say she defied me; and, indeed, I
could hardly tell how to begin to remonstrate with her, so much did I
feel that Miss Matty, in her increasing infirmity, needed the attendance
of this kind and faithful woman.

“Well”—said I at last.

“I’m thankful you begin with ‘well!’  If you’d have begun with ‘but,’ as
you did afore, I’d not ha’ listened to you.  Now you may go on.”

“I know you would be a great loss to Miss Matty, Martha”—

“I telled her so.  A loss she’d never cease to be sorry for,” broke in
Martha triumphantly.

“Still, she will have so little—so very little—to live upon, that I
don’t see just now how she could find you food—she will even be pressed
for her own.  I tell you this, Martha, because I feel you are like a
friend to dear Miss Matty, but you know she might not like to have it
spoken about.”

Apparently this was even a blacker view of the subject than Miss Matty
had presented to her, for Martha just sat down on the first chair that
came to hand, and cried out loud (we had been standing in the kitchen).

At last she put her apron down, and looking me earnestly in the face,
asked, “Was that the reason Miss Matty wouldn’t order a pudding to-day?
She said she had no great fancy for sweet things, and you and she would
just have a mutton chop.  But I’ll be up to her.  Never you tell, but
I’ll make her a pudding, and a pudding she’ll like, too, and I’ll pay
for it myself; so mind you see she eats it.  Many a one has been
comforted in their sorrow by seeing a good dish come upon the table.”

I was rather glad that Martha’s energy had taken the immediate and
practical direction of pudding-making, for it staved off the quarrelsome
discussion as to whether she should or should not leave Miss Matty’s
service.  She began to tie on a clean apron, and otherwise prepare
herself for going to the shop for the butter, eggs, and what else she
might require.  She would not use a scrap of the articles already in the
house for her cookery, but went to an old tea-pot in which her private
store of money was deposited, and took out what she wanted.

I found Miss Matty very quiet, and not a little sad; but by-and-by she
tried to smile for my sake.  It was settled that I was to write to my
father, and ask him to come over and hold a consultation, and as soon as
this letter was despatched we began to talk over future plans.  Miss
Matty’s idea was to take a single room, and retain as much of her
furniture as would be necessary to fit up this, and sell the rest, and
there to quietly exist upon what would remain after paying the rent.
For my part, I was more ambitious and less contented.  I thought of all
the things by which a woman, past middle age, and with the education
common to ladies fifty years ago, could earn or add to a living without
materially losing caste; but at length I put even this last clause on
one side, and wondered what in the world Miss Matty could do.

Teaching was, of course, the first thing that suggested itself.  If Miss
Matty could teach children anything, it would throw her among the little
elves in whom her soul delighted.  I ran over her accomplishments.  Once
upon a time I had heard her say she could play “Ah! vous dirai-je,
maman?” on the piano, but that was long, long ago; that faint shadow of
musical acquirement had died out years before.  She had also once been
able to trace out patterns very nicely for muslin embroidery, by dint of
placing a piece of silver paper over the design to be copied, and
holding both against the window-pane while she marked the scollop and
eyelet-holes.  But that was her nearest approach to the accomplishment
of drawing, and I did not think it would go very far.  Then again, as to
the branches of a solid English education—fancy work and the use of the
globes—such as the mistress of the Ladies’ Seminary, to which all the
tradespeople in Cranford sent their daughters, professed to teach.  Miss
Matty’s eyes were failing her, and I doubted if she could discover the
number of threads in a worsted-work pattern, or rightly appreciate the
different shades required for Queen Adelaide’s face in the loyal
wool-work now fashionable in Cranford.  As for the use of the globes, I
had never been able to find it out myself, so perhaps I was not a good
judge of Miss Matty’s capability of instructing in this branch of
education; but it struck me that equators and tropics, and such mystical
circles, were very imaginary lines indeed to her, and that she looked
upon the signs of the Zodiac as so many remnants of the Black Art.

What she piqued herself upon, as arts in which she excelled, was making
candle-lighters, or “spills” (as she preferred calling them), of
coloured paper, cut so as to resemble feathers, and knitting garters in
a variety of dainty stitches.  I had once said, on receiving a present
of an elaborate pair, that I should feel quite tempted to drop one of
them in the street, in order to have it admired; but I found this little
joke (and it was a very little one) was such a distress to her sense of
propriety, and was taken with such anxious, earnest alarm, lest the
temptation might some day prove too strong for me, that I quite
regretted having ventured upon it.  A present of these
delicately-wrought garters, a bunch of gay “spills,” or a set of cards
on which sewing-silk was wound in a mystical manner, were the well-known
tokens of Miss Matty’s favour. But would any one pay to have their
children taught these arts? or, indeed, would Miss Matty sell, for
filthy lucre, the knack and the skill with which she made trifles of
value to those who loved her?

I had to come down to reading, writing, and arithmetic; and, in reading
the chapter every morning, she always coughed before coming to long
words.  I doubted her power of getting through a genealogical chapter,
with any number of coughs.  Writing she did well and delicately—but
spelling!  She seemed to think that the more out-of-the-way this was,
and the more trouble it cost her, the greater the compliment she paid to
her correspondent; and words that she would spell quite correctly in her
letters to me became perfect enigmas when she wrote to my father.

No! there was nothing she could teach to the rising generation of
Cranford, unless they had been quick learners and ready imitators of her
patience, her humility, her sweetness, her quiet contentment with all
that she could not do.  I pondered and pondered until dinner was
announced by Martha, with a face all blubbered and swollen with crying.

Miss Matty had a few little peculiarities which Martha was apt to regard
as whims below her attention, and appeared to consider as childish
fancies of which an old lady of fifty-eight should try and cure herself.
But to-day everything was attended to with the most careful regard.  The
bread was cut to the imaginary pattern of excellence that existed in
Miss Matty’s mind, as being the way which her mother had preferred, the
curtain was drawn so as to exclude the dead brick wall of a neighbour’s
stable, and yet left so as to show every tender leaf of the poplar which
was bursting into spring beauty.  Martha’s tone to Miss Matty was just
such as that good, rough-spoken servant usually kept sacred for little
children, and which I had never heard her use to any grown-up person.

I had forgotten to tell Miss Matty about the pudding, and I was afraid
she might not do justice to it, for she had evidently very little
appetite this day; so I seized the opportunity of letting her into the
secret while Martha took away the meat.  Miss Matty’s eyes filled with
tears, and she could not speak, either to express surprise or delight,
when Martha returned bearing it aloft, made in the most wonderful
representation of a lion _couchant_ that ever was moulded.  Martha’s
face gleamed with triumph as she set it down before Miss Matty with an
exultant “There!”  Miss Matty wanted to speak her thanks, but could not;
so she took Martha’s hand and shook it warmly, which set Martha off
crying, and I myself could hardly keep up the necessary composure.
Martha burst out of the room, and Miss Matty had to clear her voice once
or twice before she could speak.  At last she said, “I should like to
keep this pudding under a glass shade, my dear!” and the notion of the
lion _couchant_, with his currant eyes, being hoisted up to the place of
honour on a mantelpiece, tickled my hysterical fancy, and I began to
laugh, which rather surprised Miss Matty.

“I am sure, dear, I have seen uglier things under a glass shade before
now,” said she.

So had I, many a time and oft, and I accordingly composed my countenance
(and now I could hardly keep from crying), and we both fell to upon the
pudding, which was indeed excellent—only every morsel seemed to choke
us, our hearts were so full.

We had too much to think about to talk much that afternoon.  It passed
over very tranquilly.  But when the tea-urn was brought in a new thought
came into my head.  Why should not Miss Matty sell tea—be an agent to
the East India Tea Company which then existed?  I could see no
objections to this plan, while the advantages were many—always supposing
that Miss Matty could get over the degradation of condescending to
anything like trade.  Tea was neither greasy nor sticky—grease and
stickiness being two of the qualities which Miss Matty could not endure.
 No shop-window would be required.  A small, genteel notification of her
being licensed to sell tea would, it is true, be necessary, but I hoped
that it could be placed where no one would see it.  Neither was tea a
heavy article, so as to tax Miss Matty’s fragile strength.  The only
thing against my plan was the buying and selling involved.

While I was giving but absent answers to the questions Miss Matty was
putting—almost as absently—we heard a clumping sound on the stairs, and
a whispering outside the door, which indeed once opened and shut as if
by some invisible agency.  After a little while Martha came in, dragging
after her a great tall young man, all crimson with shyness, and finding
his only relief in perpetually sleeking down his hair.

“Please, ma’am, he’s only Jem Hearn,” said Martha, by way of an
introduction; and so out of breath was she that I imagine she had had
some bodily struggle before she could overcome his reluctance to be
presented on the courtly scene of Miss Matilda Jenkyns’s drawing-room.

“And please, ma’am, he wants to marry me off-hand.  And please, ma’am,
we want to take a lodger—just one quiet lodger, to make our two ends
meet; and we’d take any house conformable; and, oh dear Miss Matty, if I
may be so bold, would you have any objections to lodging with us?  Jem
wants it as much as I do.”  [To Jem ]—“You great oaf! why can’t you back
me!—But he does want it all the same, very bad—don’t you, Jem?—only, you
see, he’s dazed at being called on to speak before quality.”

         [Picture: Please, ma’am, he wants to marry me off-hand]

“It’s not that,” broke in Jem.  “It’s that you’ve taken me all on a
sudden, and I didn’t think for to get married so soon—and such quick
words does flabbergast a man.  It’s not that I’m against it, ma’am”
(addressing Miss Matty), “only Martha has such quick ways with her when
once she takes a thing into her head; and marriage, ma’am—marriage nails
a man, as one may say.  I dare say I shan’t mind it after it’s once
over.”

“Please, ma’am,” said Martha—who had plucked at his sleeve, and nudged
him with her elbow, and otherwise tried to interrupt him all the time
he had been speaking—“don’t mind him, he’ll come to; ’twas only last
night he was an-axing me, and an-axing me, and all the more because I
said I could not think of it for years to come, and now he’s only taken
aback with the suddenness of the joy; but you know, Jem, you are just as
full as me about wanting a lodger.”  (Another great nudge.)

“Ay! if Miss Matty would lodge with us—otherwise I’ve no mind to be
cumbered with strange folk in the house,” said Jem, with a want of tact
which I could see enraged Martha, who was trying to represent a lodger
as the great object they wished to obtain, and that, in fact, Miss Matty
would be smoothing their path and conferring a favour, if she would only
come and live with them.

Miss Matty herself was bewildered by the pair; their, or rather Martha’s
sudden resolution in favour of matrimony staggered her, and stood
between her and the contemplation of the plan which Martha had at heart.
 Miss Matty began—

“Marriage is a very solemn thing, Martha.”

“It is indeed, ma’am,” quoth Jem.  “Not that I’ve no objections to
Martha.”

“You’ve never let me a-be for asking me for to fix when I would be
married,” said Martha—her face all a-fire, and ready to cry with
vexation—“and now you’re shaming me before my missus and all.”

“Nay, now!  Martha don’t ee! don’t ee! only a man likes to have
breathing-time,” said Jem, trying to possess himself of her hand, but in
vain.  Then seeing that she was more seriously hurt than he had
imagined, he seemed to try to rally his scattered faculties, and with
more straightforward dignity than, ten minutes before, I should have
thought it possible for him to assume, he turned to Miss Matty, and
said, “I hope, ma’am, you know that I am bound to respect every one who
has been kind to Martha.  I always looked on her as to be my wife—some
time; and she has often and often spoken of you as the kindest lady that
ever was; and though the plain truth is, I would not like to be troubled
with lodgers of the common run, yet if, ma’am, you’d honour us by living
with us, I’m sure Martha would do her best to make you comfortable; and
I’d keep out of your way as much as I could, which I reckon would be the
best kindness such an awkward chap as me could do.”

Miss Matty had been very busy with taking off her spectacles, wiping
them, and replacing them; but all she could say was, “Don’t let any
thought of me hurry you into marriage: pray don’t.  Marriage is such a
very solemn thing!”

“But Miss Matilda will think of your plan, Martha,” said I, struck with
the advantages that it offered, and unwilling to lose the opportunity of
considering about it.  “And I’m sure neither she nor I can ever forget
your kindness; nor yours either, Jem.”

“Why, yes, ma’am!  I’m sure I mean kindly, though I’m a bit fluttered by
being pushed straight ahead into matrimony, as it were, and mayn’t
express myself conformable.  But I’m sure I’m willing enough, and give
me time to get accustomed; so, Martha, wench, what’s the use of crying
so, and slapping me if I come near?”

This last was _sotto voce_, and had the effect of making Martha bounce
out of the room, to be followed and soothed by her lover.  Whereupon
Miss Matty sat down and cried very heartily, and accounted for it by
saying that the thought of Martha being married so soon gave her quite a
shock, and that she should never forgive herself if she thought she was
hurrying the poor creature.  I think my pity was more for Jem, of the
two; but both Miss Matty and I appreciated to the full the kindness of
the honest couple, although we said little about this, and a good deal
about the chances and dangers of matrimony.

The next morning, very early, I received a note from Miss Pole, so
mysteriously wrapped up, and with so many seals on it to secure secrecy,
that I had to tear the paper before I could unfold it.  And when I came
to the writing I could hardly understand the meaning, it was so involved
and oracular.  I made out, however, that I was to go to Miss Pole’s at
eleven o’clock; the number _eleven_ being written in full length as well
as in numerals, and _A.M._ twice dashed under, as if I were very likely
to come at eleven at night, when all Cranford was usually abed and
asleep by ten.  There was no signature except Miss Pole’s initials
reversed, P.E.; but as Martha had given me the note, “with Miss Pole’s
kind regards,” it needed no wizard to find out who sent it; and if the
writer’s name was to be kept secret, it was very well that I was alone
when Martha delivered it.

I went as requested to Miss Pole’s.  The door was opened to me by her
little maid Lizzy in Sunday trim, as if some grand event was impending
over this work-day.  And the drawing-room upstairs was arranged in
accordance with this idea.  The table was set out with the best green
card-cloth, and writing materials upon it.  On the little chiffonier was
a tray with a newly-decanted bottle of cowslip wine, and some
ladies’-finger biscuits.  Miss Pole herself was in solemn array, as if
to receive visitors, although it was only eleven o’clock.  Mrs Forrester
was there, crying quietly and sadly, and my arrival seemed only to call
forth fresh tears.  Before we had finished our greetings, performed with
lugubrious mystery of demeanour, there was another rat-tat-tat, and Mrs
Fitz-Adam appeared, crimson with walking and excitement.  It seemed as
if this was all the company expected; for now Miss Pole made several
demonstrations of being about to open the business of the meeting, by
stirring the fire, opening and shutting the door, and coughing and
blowing her nose.  Then she arranged us all round the table, taking care
to place me opposite to her; and last of all, she inquired of me if the
sad report was true, as she feared it was, that Miss Matty had lost all
her fortune?

Of course, I had but one answer to make; and I never saw more unaffected
sorrow depicted on any countenances than I did there on the three before
me.

“I wish Mrs Jamieson was here!” said Mrs Forrester at last; but to judge
from Mrs Fitz-Adam’s face, she could not second the wish.

“But without Mrs Jamieson,” said Miss Pole, with just a sound of
offended merit in her voice, “we, the ladies of Cranford, in my
drawing-room assembled, can resolve upon something.  I imagine we are
none of us what may be called rich, though we all possess a genteel
competency, sufficient for tastes that are elegant and refined, and
would not, if they could, be vulgarly ostentatious.”  (Here I observed
Miss Pole refer to a small card concealed in her hand, on which I
imagine she had put down a few notes.)

“Miss Smith,” she continued, addressing me (familiarly known as “Mary”
to all the company assembled, but this was a state occasion), “I have
conversed in private—I made it my business to do so yesterday
afternoon—with these ladies on the misfortune which has happened to our
friend, and one and all of us have agreed that while we have a
superfluity, it is not only a duty, but a pleasure—a true pleasure,
Mary!”—her voice was rather choked just here, and she had to wipe her
spectacles before she could go on—“to give what we can to assist
her—Miss Matilda Jenkyns.  Only in consideration of the feelings of
delicate independence existing in the mind of every refined female”—I
was sure she had got back to the card now—“we wish to contribute our
mites in a secret and concealed manner, so as not to hurt the feelings I
have referred to. And our object in requesting you to meet us this
morning is that, believing you are the daughter—that your father is, in
fact, her confidential adviser, in all pecuniary matters, we imagined
that, by consulting with him, you might devise some mode in which our
contribution could be made to appear the legal due which Miss Matilda
Jenkyns ought to receive from—  Probably your father, knowing her
investments, can fill up the blank.”

Miss Pole concluded her address, and looked round for approval and
agreement.

“I have expressed your meaning, ladies, have I not?  And while Miss
Smith considers what reply to make, allow me to offer you some little
refreshment.”

I had no great reply to make: I had more thankfulness at my heart for
their kind thoughts than I cared to put into words; and so I only
mumbled out something to the effect “that I would name what Miss Pole
had said to my father, and that if anything could be arranged for dear
Miss Matty,”—and here I broke down utterly, and had to be refreshed with
a glass of cowslip wine before I could check the crying which had been
repressed for the last two or three days.  The worst was, all the ladies
cried in concert.  Even Miss Pole cried, who had said a hundred times
that to betray emotion before any one was a sign of weakness and want of
self-control.  She recovered herself into a slight degree of impatient
anger, directed against me, as having set them all off; and, moreover, I
think she was vexed that I could not make a speech back in return for
hers; and if I had known beforehand what was to be said, and had a card
on which to express the probable feelings that would rise in my heart, I
would have tried to gratify her.  As it was, Mrs Forrester was the
person to speak when we had recovered our composure.

“I don’t mind, among friends, stating that I—no!  I’m not poor exactly,
but I don’t think I’m what you may call rich; I wish I were, for dear
Miss Matty’s sake—but, if you please, I’ll write down in a sealed paper
what I can give.  I only wish it was more; my dear Mary, I do indeed.”

Now I saw why paper, pens, and ink were provided.  Every lady wrote down
the sum she could give annually, signed the paper, and sealed it
mysteriously.  If their proposal was acceded to, my father was to be
allowed to open the papers, under pledge of secrecy.  If not, they were
to be returned to their writers.

When the ceremony had been gone through, I rose to depart; but each lady
seemed to wish to have a private conference with me.  Miss Pole kept me
in the drawing-room to explain why, in Mrs Jamieson’s absence, she had
taken the lead in this “movement,” as she was pleased to call it, and
also to inform me that she had heard from good sources that Mrs Jamieson
was coming home directly in a state of high displeasure against her
sister-in-law, who was forthwith to leave her house, and was, she
believed, to return to Edinburgh that very afternoon.  Of course this
piece of intelligence could not be communicated before Mrs Fitz-Adam,
more especially as Miss Pole was inclined to think that Lady Glenmire’s
engagement to Mr Hoggins could not possibly hold against the blaze of
Mrs Jamieson’s displeasure.  A few hearty inquiries after Miss Matty’s
health concluded my interview with Miss Pole.

On coming downstairs I found Mrs Forrester waiting for me at the
entrance to the dining-parlour; she drew me in, and when the door was
shut, she tried two or three times to begin on some subject, which was
so unapproachable apparently, that I began to despair of our ever
getting to a clear understanding.  At last out it came; the poor old
lady trembling all the time as if it were a great crime which she was
exposing to daylight, in telling me how very, very little she had to
live upon; a confession which she was brought to make from a dread lest
we should think that the small contribution named in her paper bore any
proportion to her love and regard for Miss Matty.  And yet that sum
which she so eagerly relinquished was, in truth, more than a twentieth
part of what she had to live upon, and keep house, and a little
serving-maid, all as became one born a Tyrrell.  And when the whole
income does not nearly amount to a hundred pounds, to give up a
twentieth of it will necessitate many careful economies, and many pieces
of self-denial, small and insignificant in the world’s account, but
bearing a different value in another account-book that I have heard of.
She did so wish she was rich, she said, and this wish she kept
repeating, with no thought of herself in it, only with a longing,
yearning desire to be able to heap up Miss Matty’s measure of comforts.

It was some time before I could console her enough to leave her; and
then, on quitting the house, I was waylaid by Mrs Fitz-Adam, who had
also her confidence to make of pretty nearly the opposite description.
She had not liked to put down all that she could afford and was ready to
give.  She told me she thought she never could look Miss Matty in the
face again if she presumed to be giving her so much as she should like
to do.  “Miss Matty!” continued she, “that I thought was such a fine
young lady when I was nothing but a country girl, coming to market with
eggs and butter and such like things.  For my father, though well-to-do,
would always make me go on as my mother had done before me, and I had to
come into Cranford every Saturday, and see after sales, and prices, and
what not.  And one day, I remember, I met Miss Matty in the lane that
leads to Combehurst; she was walking on the footpath, which, you know,
is raised a good way above the road, and a gentleman rode beside her,
and was talking to her, and she was looking down at some primroses she
had gathered, and pulling them all to pieces, and I do believe she was
crying.  But after she had passed, she turned round and ran after me to
ask—oh, so kindly—about my poor mother, who lay on her death-bed; and
when I cried she took hold of my hand to comfort me—and the gentleman
waiting for her all the time—and her poor heart very full of something,
I am sure; and I thought it such an honour to be spoken to in that
pretty way by the rector’s daughter, who visited at Arley Hall.  I have
loved her ever since, though perhaps I’d no right to do it; but if you
can think of any way in which I might be allowed to give a little more
without any one knowing it, I should be so much obliged to you, my dear.
 And my brother would be delighted to doctor her for nothing—medicines,
leeches, and all. I know that he and her ladyship (my dear, I little
thought in the days I was telling you of that I should ever come to be
sister-in-law to a ladyship!) would do anything for her.  We all would.”

I told her I was quite sure of it, and promised all sorts of things in
my anxiety to get home to Miss Matty, who might well be wondering what
had become of me—absent from her two hours without being able to account
for it.  She had taken very little note of time, however, as she had
been occupied in numberless little arrangements preparatory to the great
step of giving up her house.  It was evidently a relief to her to be
doing something in the way of retrenchment, for, as she said, whenever
she paused to think, the recollection of the poor fellow with his bad
five-pound note came over her, and she felt quite dishonest; only if it
made her so uncomfortable, what must it not be doing to the directors of
the bank, who must know so much more of the misery consequent upon this
failure?  She almost made me angry by dividing her sympathy between
these directors (whom she imagined overwhelmed by self-reproach for the
mismanagement of other people’s affairs) and those who were suffering
like her.  Indeed, of the two, she seemed to think poverty a lighter
burden than self-reproach; but I privately doubted if the directors
would agree with her.

Old hoards were taken out and examined as to their money value which
luckily was small, or else I don’t know how Miss Matty would have
prevailed upon herself to part with such things as her mother’s
wedding-ring, the strange, uncouth brooch with which her father had
disfigured his shirt-frill, &c.  However, we arranged things a little in
order as to their pecuniary estimation, and were all ready for my father
when he came the next morning.

I am not going to weary you with the details of all the business we went
through; and one reason for not telling about them is, that I did not
understand what we were doing at the time, and cannot recollect it now.
Miss Matty and I sat assenting to accounts, and schemes, and reports,
and documents, of which I do not believe we either of us understood a
word; for my father was clear-headed and decisive, and a capital man of
business, and if we made the slightest inquiry, or expressed the
slightest want of comprehension, he had a sharp way of saying, “Eh? eh?
it’s as clear as daylight.  What’s your objection?”  And as we had not
comprehended anything of what he had proposed, we found it rather
difficult to shape our objections; in fact, we never were sure if we had
any.  So presently Miss Matty got into a nervously acquiescent state,
and said “Yes,” and “Certainly,” at every pause, whether required or
not; but when I once joined in as chorus to a “Decidedly,” pronounced by
Miss Matty in a tremblingly dubious tone, my father fired round at me
and asked me “What there was to decide?”  And I am sure to this day I
have never known.  But, in justice to him, I must say he had come over
from Drumble to help Miss Matty when he could ill spare the time, and
when his own affairs were in a very anxious state.

          [Picture: Miss Matty and I sat assenting to accounts]

While Miss Matty was out of the room giving orders for luncheon—and
sadly perplexed between her desire of honouring my father by a delicate,
dainty meal, and her conviction that she had no right, now that all her
money was gone, to indulge this desire—I told him of the meeting of the
Cranford ladies at Miss Pole’s the day before.  He kept brushing his
hand before his eyes as I spoke—and when I went back to Martha’s offer
the evening before, of receiving Miss Matty as a lodger, he fairly
walked away from me to the window, and began drumming with his fingers
upon it. Then he turned abruptly round, and said, “See, Mary, how a
good, innocent life makes friends all around.  Confound it!  I could
make a good lesson out of it if I were a parson; but, as it is, I can’t
get a tail to my sentences—only I’m sure you feel what I want to say.
You and I will have a walk after lunch and talk a bit more about these
plans.”

The lunch—a hot savoury mutton-chop, and a little of the cold loin
sliced and fried—was now brought in.  Every morsel of this last dish was
finished, to Martha’s great gratification.  Then my father bluntly told
Miss Matty he wanted to talk to me alone, and that he would stroll out
and see some of the old places, and then I could tell her what plan we
thought desirable.  Just before we went out, she called me back and
said, “Remember, dear, I’m the only one left—I mean, there’s no one to
be hurt by what I do.  I’m willing to do anything that’s right and
honest; and I don’t think, if Deborah knows where she is, she’ll care so
very much if I’m not genteel; because, you see, she’ll know all, dear.
Only let me see what I can do, and pay the poor people as far as I’m
able.”

I gave her a hearty kiss, and ran after my father.  The result of our
conversation was this.  If all parties were agreeable, Martha and Jem
were to be married with as little delay as possible, and they were to
live on in Miss Matty’s present abode; the sum which the Cranford ladies
had agreed to contribute annually being sufficient to meet the greater
part of the rent, and leaving Martha free to appropriate what Miss Matty
should pay for her lodgings to any little extra comforts required.
About the sale, my father was dubious at first.  He said the old rectory
furniture, however carefully used and reverently treated, would fetch
very little; and that little would be but as a drop in the sea of the
debts of the Town and County Bank.  But when I represented how Miss
Matty’s tender conscience would be soothed by feeling that she had done
what she could, he gave way; especially after I had told him the
five-pound note adventure, and he had scolded me well for allowing it.
I then alluded to my idea that she might add to her small income by
selling tea; and, to my surprise (for I had nearly given up the plan),
my father grasped at it with all the energy of a tradesman.  I think he
reckoned his chickens before they were hatched, for he immediately ran
up the profits of the sales that she could effect in Cranford to more
than twenty pounds a year.  The small dining-parlour was to be converted
into a shop, without any of its degrading characteristics; a table was
to be the counter; one window was to be retained unaltered, and the
other changed into a glass door.  I evidently rose in his estimation for
having made this bright suggestion.  I only hoped we should not both
fall in Miss Matty’s.

But she was patient and content with all our arrangements.  She knew,
she said, that we should do the best we could for her; and she only
hoped, only stipulated, that she should pay every farthing that she
could be said to owe, for her father’s sake, who had been so respected
in Cranford.  My father and I had agreed to say as little as possible
about the bank, indeed never to mention it again, if it could be helped.
 Some of the plans were evidently a little perplexing to her; but she
had seen me sufficiently snubbed in the morning for want of
comprehension to venture on too many inquiries now; and all passed over
well with a hope on her part that no one would be hurried into marriage
on her account. When we came to the proposal that she should sell tea, I
could see it was rather a shock to her; not on account of any personal
loss of gentility involved, but only because she distrusted her own
powers of action in a new line of life, and would timidly have preferred
a little more privation to any exertion for which she feared she was
unfitted. However, when she saw my father was bent upon it, she sighed,
and said she would try; and if she did not do well, of course she might
give it up.  One good thing about it was, she did not think men ever
bought tea; and it was of men particularly she was afraid.  They had
such sharp loud ways with them; and did up accounts, and counted their
change so quickly! Now, if she might only sell comfits to children, she
was sure she could please them!




CHAPTER XV.
A HAPPY RETURN


BEFORE I left Miss Matty at Cranford everything had been comfortably
arranged for her.  Even Mrs Jamieson’s approval of her selling tea had
been gained.  That oracle had taken a few days to consider whether by so
doing Miss Matty would forfeit her right to the privileges of society in
Cranford.  I think she had some little idea of mortifying Lady Glenmire
by the decision she gave at last; which was to this effect: that whereas
a married woman takes her husband’s rank by the strict laws of
precedence, an unmarried woman retains the station her father occupied.
So Cranford was allowed to visit Miss Matty; and, whether allowed or
not, it intended to visit Lady Glenmire.

But what was our surprise—our dismay—when we learnt that Mr and _Mrs
Hoggins_ were returning on the following Tuesday!  Mrs Hoggins!  Had
she absolutely dropped her title, and so, in a spirit of bravado, cut
the aristocracy to become a Hoggins!  She, who might have been called
Lady Glenmire to her dying day!  Mrs Jamieson was pleased.  She said it
only convinced her of what she had known from the first, that the
creature had a low taste.  But “the creature” looked very happy on
Sunday at church; nor did we see it necessary to keep our veils down on
that side of our bonnets on which Mr and Mrs Hoggins sat, as Mrs
Jamieson did; thereby missing all the smiling glory of his face, and all
the becoming blushes of hers.  I am not sure if Martha and Jem looked
more radiant in the afternoon, when they, too, made their first
appearance.  Mrs Jamieson soothed the turbulence of her soul by having
the blinds of her windows drawn down, as if for a funeral, on the day
when Mr and Mrs Hoggins received callers; and it was with some
difficulty that she was prevailed upon to continue the _St James’s
Chronicle_, so indignant was she with its having inserted the
announcement of the marriage.

           [Picture: Smiling glory ... and becoming blushes]

Miss Matty’s sale went off famously.  She retained the furniture of her
sitting-room and bedroom; the former of which she was to occupy till
Martha could meet with a lodger who might wish to take it; and into this
sitting-room and bedroom she had to cram all sorts of things, which were
(the auctioneer assured her) bought in for her at the sale by an unknown
friend.  I always suspected Mrs Fitz-Adam of this; but she must have had
an accessory, who knew what articles were particularly regarded by Miss
Matty on account of their associations with her early days.  The rest of
the house looked rather bare, to be sure; all except one tiny bedroom,
of which my father allowed me to purchase the furniture for my
occasional use in case of Miss Matty’s illness.

I had expended my own small store in buying all manner of comfits and
lozenges, in order to tempt the little people whom Miss Matty loved so
much to come about her.  Tea in bright green canisters, and comfits in
tumblers—Miss Matty and I felt quite proud as we looked round us on the
evening before the shop was to be opened.  Martha had scoured the
boarded floor to a white cleanness, and it was adorned with a brilliant
piece of oil-cloth, on which customers were to stand before the
table-counter. The wholesome smell of plaster and whitewash pervaded the
apartment.  A very small “Matilda Jenkyns, licensed to sell tea,” was
hidden under the lintel of the new door, and two boxes of tea, with
cabalistic inscriptions all over them, stood ready to disgorge their
contents into the canisters.

Miss Matty, as I ought to have mentioned before, had had some scruples
of conscience at selling tea when there was already Mr Johnson in the
town, who included it among his numerous commodities; and, before she
could quite reconcile herself to the adoption of her new business, she
had trotted down to his shop, unknown to me, to tell him of the project
that was entertained, and to inquire if it was likely to injure his
business. My father called this idea of hers “great nonsense,” and
“wondered how tradespeople were to get on if there was to be a continual
consulting of each other’s interests, which would put a stop to all
competition directly.”  And, perhaps, it would not have done in Drumble,
but in Cranford it answered very well; for not only did Mr Johnson
kindly put at rest all Miss Matty’s scruples and fear of injuring his
business, but I have reason to know he repeatedly sent customers to her,
saying that the teas he kept were of a common kind, but that Miss
Jenkyns had all the choice sorts.  And expensive tea is a very favourite
luxury with well-to-do tradespeople and rich farmers’ wives, who turn up
their noses at the Congou and Souchong prevalent at many tables of
gentility, and will have nothing else than Gunpowder and Pekoe for
themselves.

But to return to Miss Matty.  It was really very pleasant to see how her
unselfishness and simple sense of justice called out the same good
qualities in others.  She never seemed to think any one would impose
upon her, because she should be so grieved to do it to them.  I have
heard her put a stop to the asseverations of the man who brought her
coals by quietly saying, “I am sure you would be sorry to bring me wrong
weight;” and if the coals were short measure that time, I don’t believe
they ever were again.  People would have felt as much ashamed of
presuming on her good faith as they would have done on that of a child.
But my father says “such simplicity might be very well in Cranford, but
would never do in the world.”  And I fancy the world must be very bad,
for with all my father’s suspicion of every one with whom he has
dealings, and in spite of all his many precautions, he lost upwards of a
thousand pounds by roguery only last year.

I just stayed long enough to establish Miss Matty in her new mode of
life, and to pack up the library, which the rector had purchased.  He
had written a very kind letter to Miss Matty, saying “how glad he should
be to take a library, so well selected as he knew that the late Mr
Jenkyns’s must have been, at any valuation put upon them.”  And when she
agreed to this, with a touch of sorrowful gladness that they would go
back to the rectory and be arranged on the accustomed walls once more,
he sent word that he feared that he had not room for them all, and
perhaps Miss Matty would kindly allow him to leave some volumes on her
shelves.  But Miss Matty said that she had her Bible and “Johnson’s
Dictionary,” and should not have much time for reading, she was afraid;
still, I retained a few books out of consideration for the rector’s
kindness.

The money which he had paid, and that produced by the sale, was partly
expended in the stock of tea, and part of it was invested against a
rainy day—_i.e._ old age or illness.  It was but a small sum, it is
true; and it occasioned a few evasions of truth and white lies (all of
which I think very wrong indeed—in theory—and would rather not put them
in practice), for we knew Miss Matty would be perplexed as to her duty
if she were aware of any little reserve-fund being made for her while
the debts of the bank remained unpaid.  Moreover, she had never been
told of the way in which her friends were contributing to pay the rent.
I should have liked to tell her this, but the mystery of the affair gave
a piquancy to their deed of kindness which the ladies were unwilling to
give up; and at first Martha had to shirk many a perplexed question as
to her ways and means of living in such a house, but by-and-by Miss
Matty’s prudent uneasiness sank down into acquiescence with the existing
arrangement.

I left Miss Matty with a good heart.  Her sales of tea during the first
two days had surpassed my most sanguine expectations.  The whole country
round seemed to be all out of tea at once.  The only alteration I could
have desired in Miss Matty’s way of doing business was, that she should
not have so plaintively entreated some of her customers not to buy green
tea—running it down as a slow poison, sure to destroy the nerves, and
produce all manner of evil.  Their pertinacity in taking it, in spite of
all her warnings, distressed her so much that I really thought she would
relinquish the sale of it, and so lose half her custom; and I was driven
to my wits’ end for instances of longevity entirely attributable to a
persevering use of green tea.  But the final argument, which settled the
question, was a happy reference of mine to the train-oil and tallow
candles which the Esquimaux not only enjoy but digest.  After that she
acknowledged that “one man’s meat might be another man’s poison,” and
contented herself thence-forward with an occasional remonstrance when
she thought the purchaser was too young and innocent to be acquainted
with the evil effects green tea produced on some constitutions, and an
habitual sigh when people old enough to choose more wisely would prefer
it.

I went over from Drumble once a quarter at least to settle the accounts,
and see after the necessary business letters.  And, speaking of letters,
I began to be very much ashamed of remembering my letter to the Aga
Jenkyns, and very glad I had never named my writing to any one.  I only
hoped the letter was lost.  No answer came.  No sign was made.

About a year after Miss Matty set up shop, I received one of Martha’s
hieroglyphics, begging me to come to Cranford very soon.  I was afraid
that Miss Matty was ill, and went off that very afternoon, and took
Martha by surprise when she saw me on opening the door.  We went into
the kitchen as usual, to have our confidential conference, and then
Martha told me she was expecting her confinement very soon—in a week or
two; and she did not think Miss Matty was aware of it, and she wanted me
to break the news to her, “for indeed, miss,” continued Martha, crying
hysterically, “I’m afraid she won’t approve of it, and I’m sure I don’t
know who is to take care of her as she should be taken care of when I am
laid up.”

I comforted Martha by telling her I would remain till she was about
again, and only wished she had told me her reason for this sudden
summons, as then I would have brought the requisite stock of clothes.
But Martha was so tearful and tender-spirited, and unlike her usual
self, that I said as little as possible about myself, and endeavoured
rather to comfort Martha under all the probable and possible misfortunes
which came crowding upon her imagination.

I then stole out of the house-door, and made my appearance as if I were
a customer in the shop, just to take Miss Matty by surprise, and gain an
idea of how she looked in her new situation.  It was warm May weather,
so only the little half-door was closed; and Miss Matty sat behind the
counter, knitting an elaborate pair of garters; elaborate they seemed to
me, but the difficult stitch was no weight upon her mind, for she was
singing in a low voice to herself as her needles went rapidly in and
out. I call it singing, but I dare say a musician would not use that
word to the tuneless yet sweet humming of the low worn voice.  I found
out from the words, far more than from the attempt at the tune, that it
was the Old Hundredth she was crooning to herself; but the quiet
continuous sound told of content, and gave me a pleasant feeling, as I
stood in the street just outside the door, quite in harmony with that
soft May morning.  I went in.  At first she did not catch who it was,
and stood up as if to serve me; but in another minute watchful pussy had
clutched her knitting, which was dropped in eager joy at seeing me.  I
found, after we had had a little conversation, that it was as Martha
said, and that Miss Matty had no idea of the approaching household
event.  So I thought I would let things take their course, secure that
when I went to her with the baby in my arms, I should obtain that
forgiveness for Martha which she was needlessly frightening herself into
believing that Miss Matty would withhold, under some notion that the new
claimant would require attentions from its mother that it would be
faithless treason to Miss Matty to render.

But I was right.  I think that must be an hereditary quality, for my
father says he is scarcely ever wrong.  One morning, within a week after
I arrived, I went to call Miss Matty, with a little bundle of flannel in
my arms.  She was very much awestruck when I showed her what it was, and
asked for her spectacles off the dressing-table, and looked at it
curiously, with a sort of tender wonder at its small perfection of
parts. She could not banish the thought of the surprise all day, but
went about on tiptoe, and was very silent.  But she stole up to see
Martha and they both cried with joy, and she got into a complimentary
speech to Jem, and did not know how to get out of it again, and was only
extricated from her dilemma by the sound of the shop-bell, which was an
equal relief to the shy, proud, honest Jem, who shook my hand so
vigorously when I congratulated him, that I think I feel the pain of it
yet.

                   [Picture: I went to call Miss Matty]

I had a busy life while Martha was laid up.  I attended on Miss Matty,
and prepared her meals; I cast up her accounts, and examined into the
state of her canisters and tumblers.  I helped her, too, occasionally,
in the shop; and it gave me no small amusement, and sometimes a little
uneasiness, to watch her ways there.  If a little child came in to ask
for an ounce of almond-comfits (and four of the large kind which Miss
Matty sold weighed that much), she always added one more by “way of
make-weight,” as she called it, although the scale was handsomely turned
before; and when I remonstrated against this, her reply was, “The little
things like it so much!”  There was no use in telling her that the fifth
comfit weighed a quarter of an ounce, and made every sale into a loss to
her pocket.  So I remembered the green tea, and winged my shaft with a
feather out of her own plumage.  I told her how unwholesome
almond-comfits were, and how ill excess in them might make the little
children.  This argument produced some effect; for, henceforward,
instead of the fifth comfit, she always told them to hold out their tiny
palms, into which she shook either peppermint or ginger lozenges, as a
preventive to the dangers that might arise from the previous sale.
Altogether the lozenge trade, conducted on these principles, did not
promise to be remunerative; but I was happy to find she had made more
than twenty pounds during the last year by her sales of tea; and,
moreover, that now she was accustomed to it, she did not dislike the
employment, which brought her into kindly intercourse with many of the
people round about.  If she gave them good weight, they, in their turn,
brought many a little country present to the “old rector’s daughter”; a
cream cheese, a few new-laid eggs, a little fresh ripe fruit, a bunch of
flowers.  The counter was quite loaded with these offerings sometimes,
as she told me.

As for Cranford in general, it was going on much as usual.  The Jamieson
and Hoggins feud still raged, if a feud it could be called, when only
one side cared much about it.  Mr and Mrs Hoggins were very happy
together, and, like most very happy people, quite ready to be friendly;
indeed, Mrs Hoggins was really desirous to be restored to Mrs Jamieson’s
good graces, because of the former intimacy.  But Mrs Jamieson
considered their very happiness an insult to the Glenmire family, to
which she had still the honour to belong, and she doggedly refused and
rejected every advance. Mr Mulliner, like a faithful clansman, espoused
his mistress’ side with ardour.  If he saw either Mr or Mrs Hoggins, he
would cross the street, and appear absorbed in the contemplation of life
in general, and his own path in particular, until he had passed them by.
 Miss Pole used to amuse herself with wondering what in the world Mrs
Jamieson would do, if either she, or Mr Mulliner, or any other member of
her household was taken ill; she could hardly have the face to call in
Mr Hoggins after the way she had behaved to them.  Miss Pole grew quite
impatient for some indisposition or accident to befall Mrs Jamieson or
her dependents, in order that Cranford might see how she would act under
the perplexing circumstances.

Martha was beginning to go about again, and I had already fixed a limit,
not very far distant, to my visit, when one afternoon, as I was sitting
in the shop-parlour with Miss Matty—I remember the weather was colder
now than it had been in May, three weeks before, and we had a fire and
kept the door fully closed—we saw a gentleman go slowly past the window,
and then stand opposite to the door, as if looking out for the name
which we had so carefully hidden.  He took out a double eyeglass and
peered about for some time before he could discover it.  Then he came
in.  And, all on a sudden, it flashed across me that it was the Aga
himself!  For his clothes had an out-of-the-way foreign cut about them,
and his face was deep brown, as if tanned and re-tanned by the sun.  His
complexion contrasted oddly with his plentiful snow-white hair, his eyes
were dark and piercing, and he had an odd way of contracting them and
puckering up his cheeks into innumerable wrinkles when he looked
earnestly at objects. He did so to Miss Matty when he first came in.
His glance had first caught and lingered a little upon me, but then
turned, with the peculiar searching look I have described, to Miss
Matty.  She was a little fluttered and nervous, but no more so than she
always was when any man came into her shop.  She thought that he would
probably have a note, or a sovereign at least, for which she would have
to give change, which was an operation she very much disliked to
perform.  But the present customer stood opposite to her, without asking
for anything, only looking fixedly at her as he drummed upon the table
with his fingers, just for all the world as Miss Jenkyns used to do.
Miss Matty was on the point of asking him what he wanted (as she told me
afterwards), when he turned sharp to me: “Is your name Mary Smith?”

“Yes!” said I.

All my doubts as to his identity were set at rest, and I only wondered
what he would say or do next, and how Miss Matty would stand the joyful
shock of what he had to reveal.  Apparently he was at a loss how to
announce himself, for he looked round at last in search of something to
buy, so as to gain time, and, as it happened, his eye caught on the
almond-comfits, and he boldly asked for a pound of “those things.”  I
doubt if Miss Matty had a whole pound in the shop, and, besides the
unusual magnitude of the order, she was distressed with the idea of the
indigestion they would produce, taken in such unlimited quantities.  She
looked up to remonstrate.  Something of tender relaxation in his face
struck home to her heart.  She said, “It is—oh, sir! can you be Peter?”
and trembled from head to foot.  In a moment he was round the table and
had her in his arms, sobbing the tearless cries of old age.  I brought
her a glass of wine, for indeed her colour had changed so as to alarm me
and Mr Peter too.  He kept saying, “I have been too sudden for you,
Matty—I have, my little girl.”

I proposed that she should go at once up into the drawing-room and lie
down on the sofa there.  She looked wistfully at her brother, whose hand
she had held tight, even when nearly fainting; but on his assuring her
that he would not leave her, she allowed him to carry her upstairs.

I thought that the best I could do was to run and put the kettle on the
fire for early tea, and then to attend to the shop, leaving the brother
and sister to exchange some of the many thousand things they must have
to say.  I had also to break the news to Martha, who received it with a
burst of tears which nearly infected me.  She kept recovering herself to
ask if I was sure it was indeed Miss Matty’s brother, for I had
mentioned that he had grey hair, and she had always heard that he was a
very handsome young man.  Something of the same kind perplexed Miss
Matty at tea-time, when she was installed in the great easy-chair
opposite to Mr Jenkyns in order to gaze her fill.  She could hardly
drink for looking at him, and as for eating, that was out of the
question.

“I suppose hot climates age people very quickly,” said she, almost to
herself.  “When you left Cranford you had not a grey hair in your head.”

“But how many years ago is that?” said Mr Peter, smiling.

“Ah, true! yes, I suppose you and I are getting old.  But still I did
not think we were so very old!  But white hair is very becoming to you,
Peter,” she continued—a little afraid lest she had hurt him by revealing
how his appearance had impressed her.

“I suppose I forgot dates too, Matty, for what do you think I have
brought for you from India?  I have an Indian muslin gown and a pearl
necklace for you somewhere in my chest at Portsmouth.”  He smiled as if
amused at the idea of the incongruity of his presents with the
appearance of his sister; but this did not strike her all at once, while
the elegance of the articles did.  I could see that for a moment her
imagination dwelt complacently on the idea of herself thus attired; and
instinctively she put her hand up to her throat—that little delicate
throat which (as Miss Pole had told me) had been one of her youthful
charms; but the hand met the touch of folds of soft muslin in which she
was always swathed up to her chin, and the sensation recalled a sense of
the unsuitableness of a pearl necklace to her age.  She said, “I’m
afraid I’m too old; but it was very kind of you to think of it.  They
are just what I should have liked years ago—when I was young.”

“So I thought, my little Matty.  I remembered your tastes; they were so
like my dear mother’s.”  At the mention of that name the brother and
sister clasped each other’s hands yet more fondly, and, although they
were perfectly silent, I fancied they might have something to say if
they were unchecked by my presence, and I got up to arrange my room for
Mr Peter’s occupation that night, intending myself to share Miss Matty’s
bed.  But at my movement, he started up.  “I must go and settle about a
room at the ‘George.’  My carpet-bag is there too.”

“No!” said Miss Matty, in great distress—“you must not go; please, dear
Peter—pray, Mary—oh! you must not go!”

She was so much agitated that we both promised everything she wished.
Peter sat down again and gave her his hand, which for better security
she held in both of hers, and I left the room to accomplish my
arrangements.

Long, long into the night, far, far into the morning, did Miss Matty and
I talk.  She had much to tell me of her brother’s life and adventures,
which he had communicated to her as they had sat alone.  She said all
was thoroughly clear to her; but I never quite understood the whole
story; and when in after days I lost my awe of Mr Peter enough to
question him myself, he laughed at my curiosity, and told me stories
that sounded so very much like Baron Munchausen’s, that I was sure he
was making fun of me.  What I heard from Miss Matty was that he had been
a volunteer at the siege of Rangoon; had been taken prisoner by the
Burmese; and somehow obtained favour and eventual freedom from knowing
how to bleed the chief of the small tribe in some case of dangerous
illness; that on his release from years of captivity he had had his
letters returned from England with the ominous word “Dead” marked upon
them; and, believing himself to be the last of his race, he had settled
down as an indigo planter, and had proposed to spend the remainder of
his life in the country to whose inhabitants and modes of life he had
become habituated, when my letter had reached him; and, with the odd
vehemence which characterised him in age as it had done in youth, he had
sold his land and all his possessions to the first purchaser, and come
home to the poor old sister, who was more glad and rich than any
princess when she looked at him.  She talked me to sleep at last, and
then I was awakened by a slight sound at the door, for which she begged
my pardon as she crept penitently into bed; but it seems that when I
could no longer confirm her belief that the long-lost was really
here—under the same roof—she had begun to fear lest it was only a waking
dream of hers; that there never had been a Peter sitting by her all that
blessed evening—but that the real Peter lay dead far away beneath some
wild sea-wave, or under some strange eastern tree. And so strong had
this nervous feeling of hers become, that she was fain to get up and go
and convince herself that he was really there by listening through the
door to his even, regular breathing—I don’t like to call it snoring, but
I heard it myself through two closed doors—and by-and-by it soothed Miss
Matty to sleep.

I don’t believe Mr Peter came home from India as rich as a nabob; he
even considered himself poor, but neither he nor Miss Matty cared much
about that.  At any rate, he had enough to live upon “very genteelly” at
Cranford; he and Miss Matty together.  And a day or two after his
arrival, the shop was closed, while troops of little urchins gleefully
awaited the shower of comfits and lozenges that came from time to time
down upon their faces as they stood up-gazing at Miss Matty’s
drawing-room windows.  Occasionally Miss Matty would say to them
(half-hidden behind the curtains), “My dear children, don’t make
yourselves ill;” but a strong arm pulled her back, and a more rattling
shower than ever succeeded.  A part of the tea was sent in presents to
the Cranford ladies; and some of it was distributed among the old people
who remembered Mr Peter in the days of his frolicsome youth.  The Indian
muslin gown was reserved for darling Flora Gordon (Miss Jessie Brown’s
daughter).  The Gordons had been on the Continent for the last few
years, but were now expected to return very soon; and Miss Matty, in her
sisterly pride, anticipated great delight in the joy of showing them Mr
Peter.  The pearl necklace disappeared; and about that time many
handsome and useful presents made their appearance in the households of
Miss Pole and Mrs Forrester; and some rare and delicate Indian ornaments
graced the drawing-rooms of Mrs Jamieson and Mrs Fitz-Adam.  I myself
was not forgotten.  Among other things, I had the handsomest-bound and
best edition of Dr Johnson’s works that could be procured; and dear Miss
Matty, with tears in her eyes, begged me to consider it as a present
from her sister as well as herself.  In short, no one was forgotten;
and, what was more, every one, however insignificant, who had shown
kindness to Miss Matty at any time, was sure of Mr Peter’s cordial
regard.




CHAPTER XVI.
PEACE TO CRANFORD


IT was not surprising that Mr Peter became such a favourite at Cranford.
The ladies vied with each other who should admire him most; and no
wonder, for their quiet lives were astonishingly stirred up by the
arrival from India—especially as the person arrived told more wonderful
stories than Sindbad the Sailor; and, as Miss Pole said, was quite as
good as an Arabian Night any evening.  For my own part, I had vibrated
all my life between Drumble and Cranford, and I thought it was quite
possible that all Mr Peter’s stories might be true, although wonderful;
but when I found that, if we swallowed an anecdote of tolerable
magnitude one week, we had the dose considerably increased the next, I
began to have my doubts; especially as I noticed that when his sister
was present the accounts of Indian life were comparatively tame; not
that she knew more than we did, perhaps less.  I noticed also that when
the rector came to call, Mr Peter talked in a different way about the
countries he had been in.  But I don’t think the ladies in Cranford
would have considered him such a wonderful traveller if they had only
heard him talk in the quiet way he did to him.  They liked him the
better, indeed, for being what they called “so very Oriental.”

One day, at a select party in his honour, which Miss Pole gave, and from
which, as Mrs Jamieson honoured it with her presence, and had even
offered to send Mr Mulliner to wait, Mr and Mrs Hoggins and Mrs
Fitz-Adam were necessarily excluded—one day at Miss Pole’s, Mr Peter
said he was tired of sitting upright against the hard-backed uneasy
chairs, and asked if he might not indulge himself in sitting
cross-legged.  Miss Pole’s consent was eagerly given, and down he went
with the utmost gravity.  But when Miss Pole asked me, in an audible
whisper, “if he did not remind me of the Father of the Faithful?” I
could not help thinking of poor Simon Jones, the lame tailor, and while
Mrs Jamieson slowly commented on the elegance and convenience of the
attitude, I remembered how we had all followed that lady’s lead in
condemning Mr Hoggins for vulgarity because he simply crossed his legs
as he sat still on his chair.  Many of Mr Peter’s ways of eating were a
little strange amongst such ladies as Miss Pole, and Miss Matty, and Mrs
Jamieson, especially when I recollected the untasted green peas and
two-pronged forks at poor Mr Holbrook’s dinner.

The mention of that gentleman’s name recalls to my mind a conversation
between Mr Peter and Miss Matty one evening in the summer after he
returned to Cranford.  The day had been very hot, and Miss Matty had
been much oppressed by the weather, in the heat of which her brother
revelled. I remember that she had been unable to nurse Martha’s baby,
which had become her favourite employment of late, and which was as much
at home in her arms as in its mother’s, as long as it remained a
light-weight, portable by one so fragile as Miss Matty.  This day to
which I refer, Miss Matty had seemed more than usually feeble and
languid, and only revived when the sun went down, and her sofa was
wheeled to the open window, through which, although it looked into the
principal street of Cranford, the fragrant smell of the neighbouring
hayfields came in every now and then, borne by the soft breezes that
stirred the dull air of the summer twilight, and then died away.  The
silence of the sultry atmosphere was lost in the murmuring noises which
came in from many an open window and door; even the children were abroad
in the street, late as it was (between ten and eleven), enjoying the
game of play for which they had not had spirits during the heat of the
day.  It was a source of satisfaction to Miss Matty to see how few
candles were lighted, even in the apartments of those houses from which
issued the greatest signs of life.  Mr Peter, Miss Matty, and I had all
been quiet, each with a separate reverie, for some little time, when Mr
Peter broke in—

“Do you know, little Matty, I could have sworn you were on the high road
to matrimony when I left England that last time!  If anybody had told me
you would have lived and died an old maid then, I should have laughed in
their faces.”

Miss Matty made no reply, and I tried in vain to think of some subject
which should effectually turn the conversation; but I was very stupid;
and before I spoke he went on—

“It was Holbrook, that fine manly fellow who lived at Woodley, that I
used to think would carry off my little Matty.  You would not think it
now, I dare say, Mary; but this sister of mine was once a very pretty
girl—at least, I thought so, and so I’ve a notion did poor Holbrook.
What business had he to die before I came home to thank him for all his
kindness to a good-for-nothing cub as I was?  It was that that made me
first think he cared for you; for in all our fishing expeditions it was
Matty, Matty, we talked about.  Poor Deborah!  What a lecture she read
me on having asked him home to lunch one day, when she had seen the
Arley carriage in the town, and thought that my lady might call.  Well,
that’s long years ago; more than half a life-time, and yet it seems like
yesterday!  I don’t know a fellow I should have liked better as a
brother-in-law.  You must have played your cards badly, my little Matty,
somehow or another—wanted your brother to be a good go-between, eh,
little one?” said he, putting out his hand to take hold of hers as she
lay on the sofa.  “Why, what’s this? you’re shivering and shaking,
Matty, with that confounded open window.  Shut it, Mary, this minute!”

I did so, and then stooped down to kiss Miss Matty, and see if she
really were chilled.  She caught at my hand, and gave it a hard
squeeze—but unconsciously, I think—for in a minute or two she spoke to
us quite in her usual voice, and smiled our uneasiness away, although
she patiently submitted to the prescriptions we enforced of a warm bed
and a glass of weak negus.  I was to leave Cranford the next day, and
before I went I saw that all the effects of the open window had quite
vanished.  I had superintended most of the alterations necessary in the
house and household during the latter weeks of my stay.  The shop was
once more a parlour: the empty resounding rooms again furnished up to
the very garrets.

There had been some talk of establishing Martha and Jem in another
house, but Miss Matty would not hear of this.  Indeed, I never saw her
so much roused as when Miss Pole had assumed it to be the most desirable
arrangement.  As long as Martha would remain with Miss Matty, Miss Matty
was only too thankful to have her about her; yes, and Jem too, who was a
very pleasant man to have in the house, for she never saw him from
week’s end to week’s end.  And as for the probable children, if they
would all turn out such little darlings as her god-daughter, Matilda,
she should not mind the number, if Martha didn’t.  Besides, the next was
to be called Deborah—a point which Miss Matty had reluctantly yielded to
Martha’s stubborn determination that her first-born was to be Matilda.
So Miss Pole had to lower her colours, and even her voice, as she said
to me that, as Mr and Mrs Hearn were still to go on living in the same
house with Miss Matty, we had certainly done a wise thing in hiring
Martha’s niece as an auxiliary.

I left Miss Matty and Mr Peter most comfortable and contented; the only
subject for regret to the tender heart of the one, and the social
friendly nature of the other, being the unfortunate quarrel between Mrs
Jamieson and the plebeian Hogginses and their following.  In joke, I
prophesied one day that this would only last until Mrs Jamieson or Mr
Mulliner were ill, in which case they would only be too glad to be
friends with Mr Hoggins; but Miss Matty did not like my looking forward
to anything like illness in so light a manner, and before the year was
out all had come round in a far more satisfactory way.

I received two Cranford letters on one auspicious October morning.  Both
Miss Pole and Miss Matty wrote to ask me to come over and meet the
Gordons, who had returned to England alive and well with their two
children, now almost grown up.  Dear Jessie Brown had kept her old kind
nature, although she had changed her name and station; and she wrote to
say that she and Major Gordon expected to be in Cranford on the
fourteenth, and she hoped and begged to be remembered to Mrs Jamieson
(named first, as became her honourable station), Miss Pole and Miss
Matty—could she ever forget their kindness to her poor father and
sister?—Mrs Forrester, Mr Hoggins (and here again came in an allusion to
kindness shown to the dead long ago), his new wife, who as such must
allow Mrs Gordon to desire to make her acquaintance, and who was,
moreover, an old Scotch friend of her husband’s.  In short, every one
was named, from the rector—who had been appointed to Cranford in the
interim between Captain Brown’s death and Miss Jessie’s marriage, and
was now associated with the latter event—down to Miss Betty Barker.  All
were asked to the luncheon; all except Mrs Fitz-Adam, who had come to
live in Cranford since Miss Jessie Brown’s days, and whom I found rather
moping on account of the omission.  People wondered at Miss Betty
Barker’s being included in the honourable list; but, then, as Miss Pole
said, we must remember the disregard of the genteel proprieties of life
in which the poor captain had educated his girls, and for his sake we
swallowed our pride.  Indeed, Mrs Jamieson rather took it as a
compliment, as putting Miss Betty (formerly _her_ maid) on a level with
“those Hogginses.”

But when I arrived in Cranford, nothing was as yet ascertained of Mrs
Jamieson’s own intentions; would the honourable lady go, or would she
not?  Mr Peter declared that she should and she would; Miss Pole shook
her head and desponded.  But Mr Peter was a man of resources.  In the
first place, he persuaded Miss Matty to write to Mrs Gordon, and to tell
her of Mrs Fitz-Adam’s existence, and to beg that one so kind, and
cordial, and generous, might be included in the pleasant invitation.  An
answer came back by return of post, with a pretty little note for Mrs
Fitz-Adam, and a request that Miss Matty would deliver it herself and
explain the previous omission.  Mrs Fitz-Adam was as pleased as could
be, and thanked Miss Matty over and over again.  Mr Peter had said,
“Leave Mrs Jamieson to me;” so we did; especially as we knew nothing
that we could do to alter her determination if once formed.

I did not know, nor did Miss Matty, how things were going on, until Miss
Pole asked me, just the day before Mrs Gordon came, if I thought there
was anything between Mr Peter and Mrs Jamieson in the matrimonial line,
for that Mrs Jamieson was really going to the lunch at the “George.”
She had sent Mr Mulliner down to desire that there might be a footstool
put to the warmest seat in the room, as she meant to come, and knew that
their chairs were very high.  Miss Pole had picked this piece of news
up, and from it she conjectured all sorts of things, and bemoaned yet
more. “If Peter should marry, what would become of poor dear Miss Matty?
 And Mrs Jamieson, of all people!”  Miss Pole seemed to think there were
other ladies in Cranford who would have done more credit to his choice,
and I think she must have had someone who was unmarried in her head, for
she kept saying, “It was so wanting in delicacy in a widow to think of
such a thing.”

When I got back to Miss Matty’s I really did begin to think that Mr
Peter might be thinking of Mrs Jamieson for a wife, and I was as unhappy
as Miss Pole about it.  He had the proof sheet of a great placard in his
hand.  “Signor Brunoni, Magician to the King of Delhi, the Rajah of
Oude, and the great Lama of Thibet,” &c. &c., was going to “perform in
Cranford for one night only,” the very next night; and Miss Matty,
exultant, showed me a letter from the Gordons, promising to remain over
this gaiety, which Miss Matty said was entirely Peter’s doing.  He had
written to ask the signor to come, and was to be at all the expenses of
the affair.  Tickets were to be sent gratis to as many as the room would
hold.  In short, Miss Matty was charmed with the plan, and said that
to-morrow Cranford would remind her of the Preston Guild, to which she
had been in her youth—a luncheon at the “George,” with the dear Gordons,
and the signor in the Assembly Room in the evening.  But I—I looked only
at the fatal words:—

    “_Under the Patronage of the_ HONOURABLE MRS JAMIESON.”

She, then, was chosen to preside over this entertainment of Mr Peter’s;
she was perhaps going to displace my dear Miss Matty in his heart, and
make her life lonely once more!  I could not look forward to the morrow
with any pleasure; and every innocent anticipation of Miss Matty’s only
served to add to my annoyance.

So, angry and irritated, and exaggerating every little incident which
could add to my irritation, I went on till we were all assembled in the
great parlour at the “George.”  Major and Mrs Gordon and pretty Flora
and Mr Ludovic were all as bright and handsome and friendly as could be;
but I could hardly attend to them for watching Mr Peter, and I saw that
Miss Pole was equally busy.  I had never seen Mrs Jamieson so roused and
animated before; her face looked full of interest in what Mr Peter was
saying.  I drew near to listen.  My relief was great when I caught that
his words were not words of love, but that, for all his grave face, he
was at his old tricks.  He was telling her of his travels in India, and
describing the wonderful height of the Himalaya mountains: one touch
after another added to their size, and each exceeded the former in
absurdity; but Mrs Jamieson really enjoyed all in perfect good faith.  I
suppose she required strong stimulants to excite her to come out of her
apathy.  Mr Peter wound up his account by saying that, of course, at
that altitude there were none of the animals to be found that existed in
the lower regions; the game,—everything was different.  Firing one day
at some flying creature, he was very much dismayed when it fell, to find
that he had shot a cherubim!  Mr Peter caught my eye at this moment, and
gave me such a funny twinkle, that I felt sure he had no thoughts of Mrs
Jamieson as a wife from that time.  She looked uncomfortably amazed—

“But, Mr Peter, shooting a cherubim—don’t you think—I am afraid that was
sacrilege!”

Mr Peter composed his countenance in a moment, and appeared shocked at
the idea, which, as he said truly enough, was now presented to him for
the first time; but then Mrs Jamieson must remember that he had been
living for a long time among savages—all of whom were heathens—some of
them, he was afraid, were downright Dissenters.  Then, seeing Miss Matty
draw near, he hastily changed the conversation, and after a little
while, turning to me, he said, “Don’t be shocked, prim little Mary, at
all my wonderful stories.  I consider Mrs Jamieson fair game, and
besides I am bent on propitiating her, and the first step towards it is
keeping her well awake.  I bribed her here by asking her to let me have
her name as patroness for my poor conjuror this evening; and I don’t
want to give her time enough to get up her rancour against the
Hogginses, who are just coming in.  I want everybody to be friends, for
it harasses Matty so much to hear of these quarrels.  I shall go at it
again by-and-by, so you need not look shocked.  I intend to enter the
Assembly Room to-night with Mrs Jamieson on one side, and my lady, Mrs
Hoggins, on the other.  You see if I don’t.”

Somehow or another he did; and fairly got them into conversation
together.  Major and Mrs Gordon helped at the good work with their
perfect ignorance of any existing coolness between any of the
inhabitants of Cranford.

Ever since that day there has been the old friendly sociability in
Cranford society; which I am thankful for, because of my dear Miss
Matty’s love of peace and kindliness.  We all love Miss Matty, and I
somehow think we are all of us better when she is near us.
                                * * * * *


CHAPTER I.


“Edith!” said Margaret, gently, “Edith!”

But as Margaret half suspected, Edith had fallen asleep. She lay curled
up on the sofa in the back drawing-room in Harley Street looking very
lovely in her white muslin and blue ribbons. If Titania had ever been
dressed in white muslin and blue ribbons, and had fallen asleep on a
crimson damask sofa in a back drawing-room, Edith might have been taken
for her. Margaret was struck afresh by her cousin’s beauty. They had
grown up together from childhood, and all along Edith had been remarked
upon by every one, except Margaret, for her prettiness; but Margaret had
never thought about it until the last few days, when the prospect of
soon losing her companion seemed to give force to every sweet quality
and charm which Edith possessed. They had been talking about wedding
dresses and wedding ceremonies; and Captain Lennox, and what he had told
Edith about her future life at Corfu, where his regiment was stationed;
and the difficulty of keeping a piano in good tune (a difficulty which
Edith seemed to consider as one of the most formidable that could befall
her in her married life), and what gowns she should want in the visits
to Scotland, which would immediately succeed her marriage; but the
whispered tone had latterly become more drowsy; and Margaret, after a
pause of a few minutes, found, as she fancied, that in spite of the buzz
in the next room, Edith had rolled herself up into a soft ball of muslin
and ribbon, and silken curls, and gone off into a peaceful little
after-dinner nap.

Margaret had been on the point of telling her cousin of some of the
plans and visions which she entertained as to her future life in the
country parsonage, where her father and mother lived; and where her
bright holidays had always been passed, though for the last ten years
her aunt Shaw’s house had been considered as her home. But in default of
a listener, she had to brood over the change in her life silently as
heretofore. It was a happy brooding, although tinged with regret at
being separated for an indefinite time from her gentle aunt and dear
cousin. As she thought of the delight of filling the important post of
only daughter in Helstone parsonage, pieces of the conversation out of
the next room came upon her ears. Her aunt Shaw was talking to the five
or six ladies who had been dining there, and whose husbands were still
in the dining-room. They were the familiar acquaintances of the house;
neighbours whom Mrs. Shaw called friends, because she happened to dine
with them more frequently than with any other people, and because if she
or Edith wanted anything from them, or they from her, they did not
scruple to make a call at each other’s houses before luncheon. These
ladies and their husbands were invited in their capacity of friends, to
eat a farewell dinner in honour of Edith’s approaching marriage. Edith
had rather objected to this arrangement, for Captain Lennox was expected
to arrive by a late train this very evening; but, although she was a
spoiled child, she was too careless and idle to have a very strong will
of her own, and gave way when she found that her mother had absolutely
ordered those extra delicacies of the season which are always supposed
to be efficacious against immoderate grief at farewell dinners. She
contented herself by leaning back in her chair, merely playing with the
food on her plate, and looking grave and absent; while all around her
were enjoying the mots of Mr. Grey, the gentleman who always took the
bottom of the table at Mrs. Shaw’s dinner parties, and asked Edith to
give them some music in the drawing-room. Mr. Grey was particularly
agreeable over this farewell dinner, and the gentlemen staid downstairs
longer than usual. It was very well they did—to judge from the
fragments of conversation which Margaret overheard.

“I suffered too much myself; not that I was not extremely happy with the
poor dear General, but still disparity of age is a drawback; one that I
was resolved Edith should not have to encounter. Of course, without any
maternal partiality, I foresaw that the dear child was likely to marry
early; indeed, I had often said that I was sure she would be married
before she was nineteen. I had quite prophetic feeling when Captain
Lennox”—and here the voice dropped into a whisper, but Margaret could
easily supply the blank. The course of true love in Edith’s case had run
remarkably smooth. Mrs. Shaw had given way to the presentiment, as she
expressed it; and had rather urged on the marriage, although it was
below the expectations which many of Edith’s acquaintances had formed
for her, a young and pretty heiress. But Mrs. Shaw said that her only
child should marry for love,—and sighed emphatically, as if love had
not been her motive for marrying the General. Mrs. Shaw enjoyed the
romance of the present engagement rather more than her daughter. Not but
that Edith was very thoroughly and properly in love; still she would
certainly have preferred a good house in Belgravia, to all the
picturesqueness of the life which Captain Lennox described at Corfu. The
very parts which made Margaret glow as she listened, Edith pretended to
shiver and shudder at; partly for the pleasure she had in being coaxed
out of her dislike by her fond lover, and partly because anything of a
gipsy or make-shift life was really distasteful to her. Yet had any one
come with a fine house, and a fine estate, and a fine title to boot,
Edith would still have clung to Captain Lennox while the temptation
lasted; when it was over, it is possible she might have had little
qualms of ill-concealed regret that Captain Lennox could not have united
in his person everything that was desirable. In this she was but her
mother’s child; who, after deliberately marrying General Shaw with no
warmer feeling than respect for his character and establishment, was
constantly, though quietly, bemoaning her hard lot in being united to
one whom she could not love.

“I have spared no expense in her trousseau,” were the next words
Margaret heard. “She has all the beautiful Indian shawls and scarfs the
General gave to me, but which I shall never wear again.”

“She is a lucky girl,” replied another voice, which Margaret knew to be
that of Mrs. Gibson, a lady who was taking a double interest in the
conversation, from the fact of one of her daughters having been married
within the last few weeks. “Helen had set her heart upon an Indian
shawl, but really when I found what an extravagant price was asked, I
was obliged to refuse her. She will be quite envious when she hears of
Edith having Indian shawls. What kind are they? Delhi? with the lovely
little borders?”

Margaret heard her aunt’s voice again, but this time it was as if she
had raised herself up from her half-recumbent position, and were looking
into the more dimly lighted back drawing-room. “Edith! Edith!” cried
she; and then she sank as if wearied by the exertion. Margaret stepped
forward.

“Edith is asleep, Aunt Shaw. Is it anything I can do?”

All the ladies said “poor child!” on receiving this distressing
intelligence about Edith; and the minute lap-dog in Mrs. Shaw’s arms
began to bark, as if excited by the burst of pity.

“Hush, Tiny! you naughty little girl! you will waken your mistress. It
was only to ask Edith if she would tell Newton to bring down her shawls;
perhaps you would go, Margaret dear?”

Margaret went up into the old nursery at the very top of the house,
where Newton was busy getting up some laces which were required for the
wedding. While Newton went (not without a muttered grumbling) to undo
the shawls, which had already been exhibited four or five times that
day, Margaret looked round upon the nursery; the first room in that
house with which she had become familiar nine years ago, when she was
brought, all untamed from the forest, to share the home, the play, and
the lessons of her cousin Edith. She remembered the dark, dim look of
the London nursery, presided over by an austere and ceremonious nurse,
who was terribly particular about clean hands and torn frocks. She
recollected the first tea up there—separate from her father and aunt,
who were dining somewhere down below, an infinite depth of stairs; for
unless she were up in the sky (the child thought), they must be deep
down in the bowels of the earth. At home—before she came to live in
Harley Street—her mother’s dressing-room had been her nursery; and as
they kept early hours in the country parsonage, Margaret had always had
her meals with her father and mother. Oh! well did the tall stately girl
of eighteen remember the tears shed with such wild passion of grief by
the little girl of nine, as she hid her face under the bed-clothes in
that first night; and how she was bidden not to cry by the nurse,
because it would disturb Miss Edith; and how she had cried as bitterly,
but more quietly, till her newly-seen, grand, pretty aunt had come
softly upstairs with Mr. Hale to show him his little sleeping daughter.
Then the little Margaret had hushed her sobs, and tried to lie quiet as
if asleep, for fear of making her father unhappy by her grief, which she
dared not express before her aunt, and which she rather thought it was
wrong to feel at all after the long hoping, and planning, and contriving
they had gone through at home, before her wardrobe could be arranged to
suit her grander circumstances, and before papa could leave his parish
to come up to London, even for a few days.

Now she had got to love the old nursery, though it was but a dismantled
place; and she looked all round with a kind of cat-like regret, at the
idea of leaving it for ever in three days.

“Ah Newton!” said she, “I think we shall all be sorry to leave this dear
old room.”

“Indeed, miss, I shan’t for one. My eyes are not so good as they were,
and the light here is so bad that I can’t see to mend laces except just
at the window, where there’s always a shocking draught—enough to give
one one’s death of cold.”

“Well, I dare say you will have both good light and plenty of warmth at
Naples. You must keep as much of your darning as you can till then.
Thank you, Newton, I can take them down—you’re busy.”

So Margaret went down laden with shawls, and snuffing up their spicy
Eastern smell. Her aunt asked her to stand as a sort of lay figure on
which to display them, as Edith was still asleep. No one thought about
it; but Margaret’s tall, finely made figure, in the black silk dress
which she was wearing as mourning for some distant relative of her
father’s, set off the long beautiful folds of the gorgeous shawls that
would have half-smothered Edith. Margaret stood right under the
chandelier, quite silent and passive, while her aunt adjusted the
draperies. Occasionally, as she was turned round, she caught a glimpse
of herself in the mirror over the chimney-piece, and smiled at her own
appearance there—the familiar features in the usual garb of a princess.
She touched the shawls gently as they hung around her, and took a
pleasure in their soft feel and their brilliant colours, and rather
liked to be dressed in such splendour—enjoying it much as a child would
do, with a quiet pleased smile on her lips. Just then the door opened,
and Mr. Henry Lennox was suddenly announced. Some of the ladies started
back, as if half-ashamed of their feminine interest in dress. Mrs. Shaw
held out her hand to the new-comer; Margaret stood perfectly still,
thinking she might be yet wanted as a sort of block for the shawls; but
looking at Mr. Lennox with a bright, amused face, as if sure of his
sympathy in her sense of the ludicrousness at being thus surprised.

Her aunt was so much absorbed in asking Mr. Henry Lennox—who had not
been able to come to dinner—all sorts of questions about his brother
the bridegroom, his sister the bridesmaid (coming with the Captain from
Scotland for the occasion), and various other members of the Lennox
family, that Margaret saw she was no more wanted as shawl-bearer, and
devoted herself to the amusement of the other visitors, whom her aunt
had for the moment forgotten. Almost immediately, Edith came in from the
back drawing-room, winking and blinking her eyes at the stronger light,
shaking back her slightly-ruffled curls, and altogether looking like the
Sleeping Beauty just startled from her dreams. Even in her slumber she
had instinctively felt that a Lennox was worth rousing herself for; and
she had a multitude of questions to ask about dear Janet, the future,
unseen sister-in-law, for whom she professed so much affection, that if
Margaret had not been very proud she might have almost felt jealous of
the mushroom rival. As Margaret sank rather more into the background on
her aunt’s joining the conversation, she saw Henry Lennox directing his
look towards a vacant seat near her; and she knew perfectly well that as
soon as Edith released him from her questioning, he would take
possession of that chair. She had not been quite sure, from her aunt’s
rather confused account of his engagements, whether he would come that
night; it was almost a surprise to see him; and now she was sure of a
pleasant evening. He liked and disliked pretty nearly the same things
that she did. Margaret’s face was lightened up into an honest, open
brightness. By-and-by he came. She received him with a smile which had
not a tinge of shyness or self-consciousness in it.

“Well, I suppose you are all in the depth of business—ladies’ business,
I mean. Very different to my business, which is the real true law
business. Playing with shawls is very different work to drawing up
settlements.”

“Ah, I knew how you would be amused to find us all so occupied in
admiring finery. But really Indian shawls are very perfect things of
their kind.”

“I have no doubt they are. Their prices are very perfect, too. Nothing
wanting.”

The gentlemen came dropping in one by one, and the buzz and noise
deepened in tone.

“This is your last dinner-party, is it not? There are no more before
Thursday?”

“No. I think after this evening we shall feel at rest, which I am sure I
have not done for many weeks; at least, that kind of rest when the hands
have nothing more to do, and all the arrangements are complete for an
event which must occupy one’s head and heart. I shall be glad to have
time to think, and I am sure Edith will.”

“I am not so sure about her, but I can fancy that you will. Whenever I
have seen you lately, you have been carried away by a whirlwind of some
other person’s making.”

“Yes,” said Margaret, rather sadly, remembering the never-ending
commotion about trifles that had been going on for more than a month
past: “I wonder if a marriage must always be preceded by what you call a
whirlwind, or whether in some cases there might not rather be a calm and
peaceful time just before it.”

“Cinderella’s godmother ordering the trousseau, the wedding-breakfast,
writing the notes of invitation, for instance,” said Mr. Lennox,
laughing.

“But are all these quite necessary troubles?” asked Margaret, looking up
straight at him for an answer. A sense of indescribable weariness of all
the arrangements for a pretty effect, in which Edith had been busied as
supreme authority for the last six weeks, oppressed her just now; and
she really wanted some one to help her to a few pleasant, quiet ideas
connected with a marriage.

“Oh, of course,” he replied with a change to gravity in his tone. “There
are forms and ceremonies to be gone through, not so much to satisfy
oneself, as to stop the world’s mouth, without which stoppage there
would be very little satisfaction in life. But how would you have a
wedding arranged?”

“Oh, I have never thought much about it; only I should like it to be a
very fine summer morning; and I should like to walk to church through
the shade of trees; and not to have so many bridesmaids, and to have no
wedding-breakfast. I dare say I am resolving against the very things
that have given me the most trouble just now.”

“No, I don’t think you are. The idea of stately simplicity accords well
with your character.”

Margaret did not quite like this speech; she winced away from it more,
from remembering former occasions on which he had tried to lead her into
a discussion (in which he took the complimentary part) about her own
character and ways of going on. She cut his speech rather short by
saying:

“It is natural for me to think of Helstone church, and the walk to it,
rather than of driving up to a London church in the middle of a paved
street.”

“Tell me about Helstone. You have never described it to me. I should
like to have some idea of the place you will be living in, when
ninety-six Harley Street will be looking dingy and dirty, and dull, and
shut up. Is Helstone a village, or a town, in the first place?”

“Oh, only a hamlet; I don’t think I could call it a village at all.
There is the church and a few houses near it on the green—cottages,
rather—with roses growing all over them.”

“And flowering all the year round, especially at Christmas—make your
picture complete,” said he.

“No,” replied Margaret, somewhat annoyed, “I am not making a picture. I
am trying to describe Helstone as it really is. You should not have said
that.”

“I am penitent,” he answered. “Only it really sounded like a village in
a tale rather than in real life.”

“And so it is,” replied Margaret, eagerly. “All the other places in
England that I have seen seem so hard and prosaic-looking, after the New
Forest. Helstone is like a village in a poem—in one of Tennyson’s
poems. But I won’t try and describe it any more. You would only laugh at
me if I told you what I think of it—what it really is.”

“Indeed, I would not. But I see you are going to be very resolved. Well,
then, tell me that which I should like still better to know: what the
parsonage is like.”

“Oh, I can’t describe my home. It is home, and I can’t put its charm
into words.”

“I submit. You are rather severe to-night, Margaret.”

“How?” said she, turning her large soft eyes round full upon him. “I did
not know I was.”

“Why, because I made an unlucky remark, you will neither tell me what
Helstone is like, nor will you say anything about your home, though I
have told you how much I want to hear about both, the latter
especially.”

“But indeed I cannot tell you about my own home. I don’t quite think it
is a thing to be talked about, unless you knew it.”

“Well, then”—pausing for a moment—“tell me what you do there. Here you
read, or have lessons, or otherwise improve your mind, till the middle
of the day; take a walk before lunch, go a drive with your aunt after,
and have some kind of engagement in the evening. There, now fill up your
day at Helstone. Shall you ride, drive, or walk?”

“Walk, decidedly. We have no horse, not even for papa. He walks to the
very extremity of his parish. The walks are so beautiful, it would be a
shame to drive—almost a shame to ride.”

“Shall you garden much? That, I believe, is a proper employment for
young ladies in the country.”

“I don’t know. I am afraid I shan’t like such hard work.”

“Archery parties—picnics—race balls—hunt balls?”

“Oh no!” said she, laughing. “Papa’s living is very small; and even if
we were near such things, I doubt if I should go to them.”

“I see, you won’t tell me anything. You will only tell me that you are
not going to do this and that. Before the vacation ends, I think I shall
pay you a call, and see what you really do employ yourself in.”

“I hope you will. Then you will see for yourself how beautiful Helstone
is. Now I must go. Edith is sitting down to play, and I just know enough
of music to turn over the leaves for her; and, besides, Aunt Shaw won’t
like us to talk.”

Edith played brilliantly. In the middle of the piece the door
half-opened, and Edith saw Captain Lennox hesitating whether to come in.
She threw down her music, and rushed out of the room, leaving Margaret
standing confused and blushing to explain to the astonished guests what
vision had shown itself to cause Edith’s sudden flight. Captain Lennox
had come earlier than was expected; or was it really so late? They
looked at their watches, were duly shocked, and took their leave.

Then Edith came back, glowing with pleasure, half-shyly, half-proudly
leading in her tall handsome Captain. His brother shook hands with him,
and Mrs. Shaw welcomed him in her gentle kindly way, which had always
something plaintive in it, arising from the long habit of considering
herself a victim to an uncongenial marriage. Now that, the General being
gone, she had every good of life, with as few drawbacks as possible, she
had been rather perplexed to find an anxiety, if not a sorrow. She had,
however, of late settled upon her own health as a source of
apprehension; she had a nervous little cough whenever she thought about
it; and some complaisant doctor ordered her just what she desired—a
winter in Italy. Mrs. Shaw had as strong wishes as most people, but she
never liked to do anything from the open and acknowledged motive of her
own good will and pleasure; she preferred being compelled to gratify
herself by some other person’s command or desire. She really did
persuade herself that she was submitting to some hard external
necessity; and thus she was able to moan and complain in her soft
manner, all the time she was in reality doing just what she liked.

It was in this way she began to speak of her own journey to Captain
Lennox, who assented, as in duty bound, to all his future mother-in-law
said, while his eyes sought Edith, who was busying herself in
re-arranging the tea-table, and ordering up all sorts of good things in
spite of his assurances that he had dined within the last two hours.

Mr. Henry Lennox stood leaning against the chimney-piece, amused with
the family scene. He was close by his handsome brother; he was the plain
one in a singularly good-looking family; but his face was intelligent,
keen, and mobile; and now and then Margaret wondered what it was that he
could be thinking about, while he kept silence, but was evidently
observing, with an interest that was slightly sarcastic, all that Edith
and she were doing. The sarcastic feeling was called out by Mrs. Shaw’s
conversation with his brother; it was separate from the interest which
was excited by what he saw. He thought it a pretty sight to see the two
cousins so busy in their little arrangements about the table. Edith
chose to do most herself. She was in a humour to enjoy showing her lover
how well she could behave as a soldier’s wife. She found out that the
water in the urn was cold, and ordered up the great kitchen tea-kettle;
the only consequence of which was that when she met it at the door, and
tried to carry it in, it was too heavy for her, and she came in pouting,
with a black mark on her muslin gown, and a little round white hand
indented by the handle, which she took to show to Captain Lennox, just
like a hurt child, and, of course, the remedy was the same in both
cases. Margaret’s quickly-adjusted spirit-lamp was the most efficacious
contrivance, though not so like the gypsy-encampment which Edith, in
some of her moods, chose to consider the nearest resemblance to a
barrack-life.

After this evening all was bustle till the wedding was over.




CHAPTER II.

ROSES AND THORNS.

    “By the soft green light in the woody glade,
    On the banks of moss where thy childhood played
    By the household tree, thro’ which thine eye
    First looked in love to the summer sky.”
                  MRS. HEMANS.


Margaret was once more in her morning dress, travelling quietly home
with her father, who had come up to assist at the wedding. Her mother
had been detained at home by a multitude of half-reasons, none of which
anybody fully understood, except Mr. Hale, who was perfectly aware that
all his arguments in favour of a grey satin gown, which was midway
between oldness and newness, had proved unavailing; and that, as he had
not the money to equip his wife afresh, from top to toe, she would not
show herself at her only sister’s only child’s wedding. If Mrs. Shaw had
guessed at the real reason why Mrs. Hale did not accompany her husband,
she would have showered down gowns upon her; but it was nearly twenty
years since Mrs. Shaw had been the poor pretty Miss Beresford, and she
had really forgotten all grievances except that of the unhappiness
arising from disparity of age in married life, on which she could
descant by the half-hour. Dearest Maria had married the man of her
heart, only eight years older than herself, with the sweetest temper,
and that blue black hair one so seldom sees. Mr. Hale was one of the
most delightful preachers she had ever heard, and a perfect model of a
parish priest. Perhaps it was not quite a logical deduction from all
these premises, but it was still Mrs. Shaw’s characteristic conclusion,
as she thought over her sister’s lot: “Married for love, what can
dearest Maria have to wish for in this world?” Mrs. Hale, if she spoke
truth, might have answered with a ready-made list, “a silver-grey glacé
silk, a white chip bonnet, oh! dozens of things for the wedding, and
hundreds of things for the house.”

Margaret only knew that her mother had not found it convenient to come,
and she was not sorry to think that their meeting and greeting would
take place at Helstone parsonage, rather than, during the confusion of
the last two or three days, in the house in Harley Street, where she
herself had had to play the part of Figaro, and was wanted everywhere at
one and the same time. Her mind and body ached now with the recollection
of all she had done and said within the last forty-eight hours. The
farewells so hurriedly taken, amongst all the other good-byes, of those
she had lived with so long, oppressed her now with a sad regret for the
times that were no more; it did not signify what those times had been,
they were gone never to return. Margaret’s heart felt more heavy than
she could ever have thought it possible in going to her own dear home,
the place and the life she had longed for for years—at that time of all
times for yearning and longing, just before the sharp senses lose their
outlines in sleep. She took her mind away with a wrench from the
recollection of the past to the bright serene contemplation of the
hopeful future. Her eyes began to see, not visions of what had been, but
the sight actually before her; her dear father leaning back asleep in
the railway carriage. His blue-black hair was grey now, and lay thinly
over his brows. The bones of his face were plainly to be seen—too
plainly for beauty, if his features had been less finely cut; as it was,
they had a grace if not a comeliness of their own. The face was in
repose; but it was rather rest after weariness than the serene calm of
the countenance of one who led a placid, contented life. Margaret was
painfully struck by the worn, anxious expression; and she went back over
the open and avowed circumstances of her father’s life, to find the
cause for the lines that spoke so plainly of habitual distress and
depression.

“Poor Frederick!” thought she, sighing. “Oh! if Frederick had but been a
clergyman, instead of going into the navy, and being lost to us all! I
wish I knew all about it. I never understood it from Aunt Shaw; I only
knew he could not come back to England because of that terrible affair.
Poor dear papa! how sad he looks! I am so glad I am going home, to be at
hand to comfort him and mamma.”

She was ready with a bright smile, in which there was not a trace of
fatigue, to greet her father when he awakened. He smiled back again, but
faintly, as if it were an unusual exertion. His face returned into its
lines of habitual anxiety. He had a trick of half-opening his mouth as
if to speak, which constantly unsettled the form of the lips, and gave
the face an undecided expression. But he had the same large, soft eyes
as his daughter,—eyes which moved slowly and almost grandly round in
their orbits, and were well veiled by their transparent white eyelids.
Margaret was more like him than like her mother. Sometimes people
wondered that parents so handsome should have a daughter who was so far
regularly beautiful; not beautiful at all, was occasionally said. Her
mouth was wide; no rosebud that could only open just enough to let out a
“yes” and “no,” and “an’t please you, sir.” But the wide mouth was one
soft curve of rich red lips; and the skin, if not white and fair, was of
an ivory smoothness and delicacy. If the look on her face was, in
general, too dignified and reserved for one so young, now, talking to
her father, it was bright as the morning,—full of dimples, and glances
that spoke of childish gladness, and boundless hope in the future.

It was the latter part of July when Margaret returned home. The forest
trees were all one dark, full, dusky green; the fern below them caught
all the slanting sunbeams; the weather was sultry and broodingly still.
Margaret used to tramp along by her father’s side, crushing down the
fern with a cruel glee, as she felt it yield under her light foot, and
send up the fragrance peculiar to it—out on the broad commons into the
warm scented light, seeing multitudes of wild, free, living creatures,
revelling in the sunshine, and the herbs and flowers it called forth.
This life—at least these walks—realised all Margaret’s anticipations.
She took a pride in her forest. Its people were her people. She made
hearty friends with them; learned and delighted in using their peculiar
words; took up her freedom amongst them; nursed their babies; talked or
read with slow distinctness to their old people; carried dainty messes
to their sick; resolved before long to teach at the school where her
father went regularly every day as to an appointed task, but she was
continually tempted off to go and see some individual friend—man,
woman, or child—in some cottage in the green shade of the forest. Her
out-of-doors life was perfect. Her in-doors life had its drawbacks. With
the healthy shame of a child, she blamed herself for her keenness of
sight in perceiving that all was not as it should be there. Her
mother—her mother always so kind and tender towards her—seemed now and
then so much discontented with their situation; thought that the bishop
strangely neglected his episcopal duties, in not giving Mr. Hale a
better living; and almost reproached her husband because he could not
bring himself to say that he wished to leave the parish, and undertake
the charge of a larger. He would sigh aloud as he answered, that if he
could do what he ought in little Helstone, he should be thankful; but
every day he was more overpowered; the world became more bewildering. At
each repeated urgency of his wife, that he would put himself in the way
of seeking some preferment, Margaret saw that her father shrank more and
more; and she strove at such times to reconcile her mother to Helstone.
Mrs. Hale said that the near neighbourhood of so many trees affected her
health; and Margaret would try to tempt her forth on to the beautiful,
broad, upland, sun-streaked, cloud-shadowed common; for she was sure
that her mother had accustomed herself too much to an in-doors life,
seldom extending her walks beyond the church, the school, and the
neighbouring cottages. This did good for a time; but when the autumn
drew on, and the weather became more changeable, her mother’s idea of
the unhealthiness of the place increased; and she repined even more
frequently that her husband, who was more learned than Mr. Hume, a
better parish priest than Mr. Houldsworth, should not have met with the
preferment that these two former neighbours of theirs had done.

This marring of the peace of home, by long hours of discontent, was what
Margaret was unprepared for. She knew, and had rather revelled in the
idea, that she should have to give up many luxuries, which had only been
troubles and trammels to her freedom in Harley Street. Her keen
enjoyment of every sensuous pleasure was balanced finely, if not
overbalanced, by her conscious pride in being able to do without them
all, if need were. But the cloud never comes in that quarter of the
horizon from which we watch for it. There had been slight complaints and
passing regrets on her mother’s part, over some trifle connected with
Helstone, and her father’s position there, when Margaret had been
spending her holidays at home before; but in the general happiness of
the recollection of those times, she had forgotten the small details
which were not so pleasant.

In the latter half of September, the autumnal rains and storms came on,
and Margaret was obliged to remain more in the house than she had
hitherto done. Helstone was at some distance from any neighbours of
their own standard of cultivation.

“It is undoubtedly one of the most out-of-the-way places in England,”
said Mrs. Hale, in one of her plaintive moods. “I can’t help regretting
constantly that papa has really no one to associate with here; he is so
thrown away; seeing no one but farmers and labourers from week’s end to
week’s end. If we only lived at the other side of the parish, it would
be something; there we should be almost within walking distance of the
Stansfields; certainly the Gormons would be within a walk.”

“Gormons,” said Margaret, “Are those the Gormons who made their fortunes
in trade at Southampton? Oh! I’m glad we don’t visit them. I don’t like
shoppy people. I think we are far better off, knowing only cottagers
and labourers, and people without pretence.”

“You must not be so fastidious, Margaret, dear!” said her mother,
secretly thinking of a young and handsome Mr. Gormon whom she had once
met at Mr. Hume’s.

“No! I call mine a very comprehensive taste; I like all people whose
occupations have to do with land; I like soldiers and sailors, and the
three learned professions, as they call them. I’m sure you don’t want me
to admire butchers and bakers, and candlestick-makers, do you, mamma?”

“But the Gormons were neither butchers nor bakers, but very respectable
coach-builders.”

“Very well. Coach-building is a trade all the same, and I think a much
more useless one than that of butchers or bakers. Oh! how tired I used
to be of the drives every day in Aunt Shaw’s carriage, and how I longed
to walk!”

And walk Margaret did, in spite of the weather. She was so happy out of
doors, at her father’s side, that she almost danced; and with the soft
violence of the west wind behind her, as she crossed some heath, she
seemed to be borne onwards, as lightly and easily as the fallen leaf
that was wafted along by the autumnal breeze. But the evenings were
rather difficult to fill up agreeably. Immediately after tea her father
withdrew into his small library, and she and her mother were left alone.
Mrs. Hale had never cared much for books, and had discouraged her
husband, very early in their married life, in his desire of reading
aloud to her, while she worked. At one time they had tried backgammon as
a resource; but as Mr. Hale grew to take an increasing interest in his
school and his parishioners, he found that the interruptions which arose
out of these duties were regarded as hardships by his wife, not to be
accepted as the natural conditions of his profession, but to be
regretted and struggled against by her as they severally arose. So he
withdrew, while the children were yet young, into his library, to spend
his evenings (if he were at home), in reading the speculative and
metaphysical books which were his delight.

When Margaret had been here before, she had brought down with her a
great box of books, recommended by masters or governess, and had found
the summer’s day all too short to get through the reading she had to do
before her return to town. Now there were only the well-bound,
little-read English Classics, which were weeded out of her father’s
library to fill up the small book-shelves in the drawing-room. Thomson’s
Season’s, Hayley’s Cowper, Middleton’s Cicero, were by far the lightest,
newest, and most amusing. The book-shelves did not afford much resource.
Margaret told her mother every particular of her London life, to all of
which Mrs. Hale listened with interest, sometimes amused and
questioning, at others a little inclined to compare her sister’s
circumstances of ease and comfort with the narrower means at Helstone
Vicarage. On such evenings Margaret was apt to stop talking rather
abruptly, and listen to the drip-drip of the rain upon the leads of the
little bow window. Once or twice Margaret found herself mechanically
counting the repetition of the monotonous sound, while she wondered if
she might venture to put a question on a subject very near to her heart,
and ask where Frederick was now; what he was doing; how long it was
since they had heard from him. But a consciousness that her mother’s
delicate health and positive dislike to Helstone, all dated from the
time of the mutiny in which Frederick had been engaged—the full account
of which Margaret had never heard, and which now seemed doomed to be
buried in sad oblivion,—made her pause and turn away from the subject
each time she approached it. When she was with her mother, her father
seemed the best person to apply to for information; and when with him,
she thought that she could speak more easily to her mother. Probably
there was nothing much to be heard that was new. In one of the letters
she had received before leaving Harley Street, her father had told her
that they had heard from Frederick; he was still at Rio, and very well
in health, and sent his best love to her; which was dry bones, but not
the living intelligence she longed for. Frederick was always spoken of,
in the rare times when his name was mentioned, as “Poor Frederick.” His
room was kept exactly as he had left it; and was regularly dusted, and
put into order by Dixon, Mrs. Hale’s maid, who touched no other part of
the household work, but always remembered the day when she had been
engaged by Lady Beresford as ladies’ maid to Sir John’s wards, the
pretty Miss Beresfords, the belles of Rutlandshire. Dixon had always
considered Mr. Hale as the blight which had fallen upon her young lady’s
prospects in life. If Miss Beresford had not been in such a hurry to
marry a poor country clergyman there was no knowing what she might have
become. But Dixon was too loyal to desert her in her affliction and
downfall (alas, her married life). She remained with her, and was
devoted to her interests; always considering herself as the good and
protecting fairy, whose duty it was to baffle the malignant giant, Mr.
Hale. Master Frederick had been her favourite and pride; and it was with
a little softening of her dignified look and manner, that she went in
weekly to arrange the chamber as carefully as if he might be coming home
that very evening.

Margaret could not help believing that there had been some late
intelligence of Frederick, unknown to her mother, which was making her
father anxious and uneasy. Mrs. Hale did not seem to perceive any
alteration in her husband’s looks or ways. His spirits were tender and
gentle, readily affected by any small piece of intelligence concerning
the welfare of others. He would be depressed for many days after
witnessing a death-bed, or hearing of any crime. But now Margaret
noticed an absence of mind, as if his thoughts were pre-occupied by some
subject, the oppression of which could not be relieved by any daily
action, such as comforting the survivors, or teaching at the school in
hope of lessening the evils in the generation to come. Mr. Hale did not
go out among his parishioners as much as usual; he was more shut up in
his study; was anxious for the village postman, whose summons to the
household was a rap on the back-kitchen window shutter—a signal which
at one time had often to be repeated before any one was sufficiently
alive to the hour of the day to understand what it was, and attend to
him. Now Mr. Hale loitered about the garden if the morning was fine, and
if not, stood dreamily by the study window until the postman had called,
or gone down the lane, giving a half-respectful, half-confidential shake
of the head to the parson, who watched him away from the sweet-briar
hedge, and past the great arbutus, before he turned into the room to
begin his day’s work, with all the signs of a heavy heart and an
occupied mind.

But Margaret was at an age when any apprehension, not absolutely based
on a knowledge of facts, is easily banished for a time by a bright sunny
day, or some happy outward circumstance. And when the brilliant fourteen
fine days of October came on, her cares were all blown away as lightly
as thistledown, and she thought of nothing but the glories of the
forest. The fern-harvest was over; and now that the rain was gone, many
a deep glade was accessible, into which Margaret had only peeped in July
and August weather. She had learnt drawing with Edith; and she had
sufficiently regretted, during the gloom of the bad weather, her idle
revelling in the beauty of the woodlands, while it had yet been fine, to
make her determined to sketch what she could before winter fairly set
in. Accordingly, she was busy preparing her board one morning, when
Sarah, the housemaid, threw wide open the drawing-room door, and
announced, “Mr. Henry Lennox.”




CHAPTER III.

“THE MORE HASTE THE WORSE SPEED.”

    “Learn to win a lady’s faith
      Nobly, as the thing is high;
    Bravely, as for life and death—
      With a loyal gravity.

    Lead her from the festive boards,
      Point her to the starry skies,
    Guard her, by your truthful words,
      Pure from courtship’s flatteries.”
                       MRS. BROWNING.


“Mr. Henry Lennox.” Margaret had been thinking of him only a moment
before, and remembering his inquiry into her probable occupations at
home. It was “parler du soleil et l’on en voit les rayons”; and the
brightness of the sun came over Margaret’s face as she put down her
board, and went forward to shake hands with him. “Tell mamma, Sarah,”
said she. “Mamma and I want to ask you so many questions about Edith; I
am so much obliged to you for coming.”

“Did not I say that I should?” asked he, in a lower tone than that in
which he had spoken.

“But I heard of you so far away in the Highlands that I never thought
Hampshire could come in.”

“Oh!” said he, more lightly, “our young couple were playing such foolish
pranks, running all sorts of risks, climbing this mountain, sailing on
that lake, that I really thought they needed a Mentor to take care of
them. And indeed they did: they were quite beyond my uncle’s management,
and kept the old gentleman in a panic for sixteen hours out of the
twenty-four. Indeed, when I once saw how unfit they were to be trusted
alone, I thought it my duty not to leave them till I had seen them
safely embarked at Plymouth.”

“Have you been at Plymouth? Oh! Edith never named that. To be sure, she
has written in such a hurry lately. Did they really sail on Tuesday?”

“Really sailed, and relieved me from many responsibilities. Edith gave
me all sorts of messages for you. I believe I have a little diminutive
note somewhere; yes, here it is.”

“Oh! thank you,” exclaimed Margaret; and then, half wishing to read it
alone and unwatched, she made the excuse of going to tell her mother
again (Sarah surely had made some mistake) that Mr. Lennox was there.

When she had left the room, he began in his scrutinising way to look
about him. The little drawing-room was looking its best in the streaming
light of the morning sun. The middle window in the bow was opened, and
clustering roses and the scarlet honeysuckle came peeping round the
corner; the small lawn was gorgeous with verbenas and geraniums of all
bright colours. But the very brightness outside made the colours within
seem poor and faded. The carpet was far from new; the chintz had been
often washed; the whole apartment was smaller and shabbier than he had
expected, as back-ground and frame-work for Margaret, herself so
queenly. He took up one of the books lying on the table; it was the
Paradise of Dante, in the proper old Italian binding of white vellum and
gold; by it lay a dictionary, and some words copied out in Margaret’s
handwriting. They were a dull list of words, but somehow he liked
looking at them. He put them down with a sigh.

“The living is evidently as small as she said. It seems strange, for the
Beresfords belong to a good family.”

Margaret meanwhile had found her mother. It was one of Mrs. Hale’s
fitful days, when everything was a difficulty and a hardship: and Mr.
Lennox’s appearance took this shape, although secretly she felt
complimented by his thinking it worth while to call.

“It is most unfortunate! We are dining early to-day, and having nothing
but cold meat, in order that the servants may get on with their ironing;
and yet, of course, we must ask him to dinner—Edith’s brother-in-law
and all. And your papa is in such low spirits this morning about
something—I don’t know what. I went into the study just now, and he had
his face on the table, covering it with his hands. I told him I was sure
Helstone air did not agree with him any more than with me, and he
suddenly lifted up his head, and begged me not to speak a word more
against Helstone, he could not bear it; if there was one place he loved
on earth it was Helstone. But I am sure, for all that, it is the damp
and relaxing air.”

Margaret felt as if a thin cold cloud had come between her and the sun.
She had listened patiently, in hopes that it might be some relief to her
mother to unburden herself; but now it was time to draw her back to Mr.
Lennox.

“Papa likes Mr. Lennox; they got on together famously at the wedding
breakfast. I daresay his coming will do papa good. And never mind the
dinner, dear mamma. Cold meat will do capitally for a lunch, which is
the light in which Mr. Lennox will most likely look upon a two o’clock
dinner.”

“But what are we to do with him till then? It is only half-past ten
now.”

“I’ll ask him to go out sketching with me. I know he draws, and that
will take him out of your way, mamma. Only do come in now; he will think
it so strange if you don’t.”

Mrs. Hale took off her black silk apron, and smoothed her face. She
looked a very pretty lady-like woman, as she greeted Mr. Lennox with the
cordiality due to one who was almost a relation. He evidently expected
to be asked to spend the day, and accepted the invitation with a glad
readiness that made Mrs. Hale wish she could add something to the cold
beef. He was pleased with everything; delighted with Margaret’s idea of
going out sketching together; would not have Mr. Hale disturbed for the
world, with the prospect of so soon meeting him at dinner. Margaret
brought out her drawing materials for him to choose from; and after the
paper and brushes had been duly selected, the two set out in the
merriest spirits in the world.

“Now, please, just stop here for a minute or two,” said Margaret. “These
are the cottages that haunted me so during the rainy fortnight,
reproaching me for not having sketched them.”

“Before they tumbled down and were no more seen. Truly, if they are to
be sketched—and they are very picturesque—we had better not put it off
till next year. But where shall we sit?”

“Oh! You might have come straight from chambers in the Temple, instead
of having been two months in the Highlands! Look at this beautiful trunk
of a tree, which the woodcutters have left just in the right place for
the light. I will put my plaid over it, and it will be a regular forest
throne.”

“With your feet in that puddle for a regal footstool! Stay, I will move,
and then you can come nearer this way. Who lives in these cottages?”

“They were built by squatters fifty or sixty years ago. One is
uninhabited; the foresters are going to take it down, as soon as the
other is dead, poor old fellow! Look—there he is—I must go and speak
to him. He is so deaf you will hear all our secrets.”

The old man stood bareheaded in the sun, leaning on his stick at the
front of his cottage. His stiff features relaxed into a slow smile as
Margaret went up and spoke to him. Mr. Lennox hastily introduced the two
figures into his sketch, and finished up the landscape with a
subordinate reference to them—as Margaret perceived, when the time came
for getting up, putting away water, and scraps of paper, and exhibiting
to each other their sketches. She laughed and blushed: Mr. Lennox
watched her countenance.

“Now, I call that treacherous,” said she. “I little thought that you
were making old Isaac and me into subjects, when you told me to ask him
the history of these cottages.”

“It was irresistible. You can’t know how strong a temptation it was. I
hardly dare tell you how much I shall like this sketch.”

He was not quite sure whether she heard this latter sentence before she
went to the brook to wash her palette. She came back rather flushed, but
looking perfectly innocent and unconscious. He was glad of it, for the
speech had slipped from him unawares—a rare thing in the case of a man
who premeditated his actions so much as Henry Lennox.

The aspect of home was all right and bright when they reached it. The
clouds on her mother’s brow had cleared off under the propitious
influence of a brace of carp, most opportunely presented by a neighbour.
Mr. Hale had returned from his morning’s round, and was awaiting his
visitor just outside the wicket gate that led into the garden. He looked
a complete gentleman in his rather threadbare coat and well-worn hat.
Margaret was proud of her father; she had always a fresh and tender
pride in seeing how favourably he impressed every stranger; still her
quick eye sought over his face and found there traces of some unusual
disturbance, which was only put aside, not cleared away.

Mr. Hale asked to look at their sketches.

“I think you have made the tints on the thatch too dark, have you not?”
as he returned Margaret’s to her, and held out his hand for Mr.
Lennox’s, which was withheld from him one moment, no more.

“No, papa! I don’t think I have. The house-leek and stone-crop have
grown so much darker in the rain. Is it not like, papa?” said she,
peeping over his shoulder, as he looked at the figures in Mr. Lennox’s
drawing.

“Yes, very like. Your figure and way of holding yourself is capital. And
it is just poor old Isaac’s stiff way of stooping his long rheumatic
back. What is this hanging from the branch of the tree? Not a bird’s
nest, surely.”

“Oh no! that is my bonnet. I never can draw with my bonnet on; it makes
my head so hot. I wonder if I could manage figures. There are so many
people about here whom I should like to sketch.”

“I should say that a likeness you very much wish to take you would
always succeed in,” said Mr. Lennox. “I have great faith in the power of
will. I think myself I have succeeded pretty well in yours.” Mr. Hale
had preceded them into the house, while Margaret was lingering to pluck
some roses, with which to adorn her morning gown for dinner.

“A regular London girl would understand the implied meaning of that
speech,” thought Mr. Lennox. “She would be up to looking through every
speech that a young man made her for the _arrière-pensée_ of a compliment.
But I don’t believe Margaret,—Stay!” exclaimed he, “Let me help you”;
and he gathered for her some velvety cramoisy roses that were above her
reach, and then dividing the spoil he placed two in his button-hole, and
sent her in, pleased and happy, to arrange her flowers.

The conversation at dinner flowed on quietly and agreeably. There were
plenty of questions to be asked on both sides—the latest intelligence
which each could give of Mrs. Shaw’s movements in Italy to be exchanged;
and in the interest of what was said, the unpretending simplicity of the
parsonage-ways—above all in the neighbourhood of Margaret, Mr. Lennox
forgot the little feeling of disappointment with which he had at first
perceived that she had spoken but the simple truth when she had
described her father’s living as very small.

“Margaret, my child, you might have gathered us some pears for our
dessert,” said Mr. Hale, as the hospitable luxury of a freshly-decanted
bottle of wine was placed on the table.

Mrs. Hale was hurried. It seemed as if desserts were impromptu and
unusual things at the parsonage; whereas, if Mr. Hale would only have
looked behind him, he would have seen biscuits and marmalade, and what
not, all arranged in formal order on the side-board. But the idea of
pears had taken possession of Mr. Hale’s mind, and was not to be got rid
of.

“There are a few brown beurrés against the south wall which are worth
all foreign fruits and preserves. Run, Margaret, and gather some.”

“I propose that we adjourn into the garden, and eat them there,” said
Mr. Lennox. “Nothing is so delicious as to set one’s teeth into the
crisp, juicy fruit, warm and scented by the sun. The worst is, the wasps
are impudent enough to dispute it with one, even at the very crisis and
summit of enjoyment.”

He rose, as if to follow Margaret, who had disappeared through the
window: he only awaited Mrs. Hale’s permission. She would rather have
wound up the dinner in the proper way, and with all the ceremonies which
had gone on so smoothly hitherto, especially as she and Dixon had got
out the finger-glasses from the store-room on purpose to be as correct
as became General Shaw’s widow’s sister; but as Mr. Hale got up
directly, and prepared to accompany his guest, she could only submit.

“I shall arm myself with a knife,” said Mr. Hale: “the days of eating
fruit so primitively as you describe are over with me. I must pare it
and quarter it before I can enjoy it.”

Margaret made a plate for the pears out of a beet-root leaf, which threw
up their brown gold colour admirably. Mr. Lennox looked more at her than
at the pears; but her father, inclined to cull fastidiously the very
zest and perfection of the hour he had stolen from his anxiety, chose
daintily the ripest fruit, and sat down on the garden bench to enjoy it
at his leisure. Margaret and Mr. Lennox strolled along the little
terrace-walk under the south wall, where the bees still hummed and
worked busily in their hives.

“What a perfect life you seem to live here! I have always felt rather
contemptuously towards the poets before, with their wishes, ‘Mine be a
cot beside a hill,’ and that sort of thing; but now I am afraid that the
truth is, I have been nothing better than a Cockney. Just now I feel as
if twenty years’ hard study of law would be amply rewarded by one year
of such an exquisite serene life as this—such skies!” looking up—“such
crimson and amber foliage, so perfectly motionless as that!” pointing to
some of the great forest trees which shut in the garden as if it were a
nest.

“You must please to remember that our skies are not always as deep a
blue as they are now. We have rain, and our leaves do fall, and get
sodden: though I think Helstone is about as perfect a place as any in
the world. Recollect how you rather scorned my description of it one
evening in Harley Street: ‘a village in a tale.’”

“Scorned, Margaret! That is rather a hard word.”

“Perhaps it is. Only I know I should have liked to have talked to you of
what I was very full at the time, and you—what must I call it
then?—spoke disrespectfully of Helstone as a mere village in a tale.”

“I will never do so again,” said he, warmly. They turned the corner of
the walk.

“I could almost wish, Margaret——” he stopped and hesitated. It was so
unusual for the fluent lawyer to hesitate that Margaret looked up at
him, in a little state of questioning wonder; but in an instant—from
what about him she could not tell—she wished herself back with her
mother—her father—anywhere away from him, for she was sure he was
going to say something to which she should not know what to reply. In
another moment the strong pride that was in her came to conquer her
sudden agitation, which she hoped he had not perceived. Of course she
could answer, and answer the right thing; and it was poor and despicable
of her to shrink from hearing any speech, as if she had not power to put
an end to it with her high maidenly dignity.

“Margaret,” said he, taking her by surprise, and getting sudden
possession of her hand, so that she was forced to stand still and
listen, despising herself for the fluttering at her heart all the time;
“Margaret, I wish you did not like Helstone so much—did not seem so
perfectly calm and happy here. I have been hoping for these three months
past to find you regretting London—and London friends, a little—enough
to make you listen more kindly” (for she was quietly, but firmly,
striving to extricate her hand from his grasp) “to one who has not much
to offer, it is true—nothing but prospects in the future—but who does
love you, Margaret, almost in spite of himself. Margaret, have I
startled you too much? Speak!” For he saw her lips quivering almost as
if she were going to cry. She made a strong effort to be calm; she would
not speak till she had succeeded in mastering her voice, and then she
said:

“I was startled. I did not know that you cared for me in that way. I
have always thought of you as a friend; and, please, I would rather go
on thinking of you so. I don’t like to be spoken to as you have been
doing. I cannot answer you as you want me to do, and yet I should feel
so sorry if I vexed you.”

“Margaret,” said he, looking into her eyes, which met his with their
open, straight look, expressive of the utmost good faith and reluctance
to give pain, “Do you”—he was going to say—“love any one else?” But it
seemed as if this question would be an insult to the pure serenity of
those eyes. “Forgive me! I have been too abrupt. I am punished. Only let
me hope. Give me the poor comfort of telling me you have never seen any
one whom you could——” Again a pause. He could not end his sentence.
Margaret reproached herself acutely as the cause of his distress.

“Ah! if you had but never got this fancy into your head! It was such a
pleasure to think of you as a friend.”

“But I may hope, may I not, Margaret, that some time you will think of
me as a lover? Not yet, I see—there is no hurry—but some time——”

She was silent for a minute or two, trying to discover the truth as it
was in her own heart, before replying, then she said:

“I have never thought of—you, but as a friend. I like to think of you
so; but I am sure I could never think of you as anything else. Pray let
us both forget that all this” (“disagreeable,” she was going to say, but
stopped short) “conversation has taken place.”

He paused before he replied. Then, in his habitual coldness of tone, he
answered:

“Of course, as your feelings are so decided, and as this conversation
has been so evidently unpleasant to you, it had better not be
remembered. That is all very fine in theory, that plan of forgetting
whatever is painful, but it will be somewhat difficult for me, at least,
to carry it into execution.”

“You are vexed,” said she, sadly; “yet how can I help it?”

She looked so truly grieved as she said this, that he struggled for a
moment with his real disappointment, and then answered more cheerfully,
but still with a little hardness in his tone:

“You should make allowances for the mortification, not only of a lover,
Margaret, but of a man not given to romance in general—prudent,
worldly, as some people call me—who has been carried out of his usual
habits by the force of a passion—well, we will say no more of that; but
in the one outlet which he has formed for the deeper and better feelings
of his nature, he meets with rejection and repulse. I shall have to
console myself with scorning my own folly. A struggling barrister to
think of matrimony!”

Margaret could not answer this. The whole tone of it annoyed her. It
seemed to touch on and call out all the points of difference which had
often repelled her in him; while yet he was the pleasantest man, the
most sympathising friend, the person of all others who understood her
best in Harley Street. She felt a tinge of contempt mingle itself with
her pain at having refused him. Her beautiful lip curled in a slight
disdain. It was well that, having made the round of the garden, they
came suddenly upon Mr. Hale, whose whereabouts had been quite forgotten
by them. He had not yet finished the pear, which he had delicately
peeled in one long strip of silver-paper thinness, and which he was
enjoying in a deliberate manner. It was like the story of the eastern
king, who dipped his head into a basin of water, at the magician’s
command, and ere he instantly took it out went through the experience of
a lifetime. Margaret felt stunned, and unable to recover her
self-possession enough to join in the trivial conversation that ensued
between her father and Mr. Lennox. She was grave, and little disposed to
speak; full of wonder when Mr. Lennox would go, and allow her to relax
into thought on the events of the last quarter of an hour. He was almost
as anxious to take his departure as she was for him to leave; but a few
minutes light and careless talking, carried on at whatever effort, was a
sacrifice which he owed to his mortified vanity, or his self-respect. He
glanced from time to time at her sad and pensive face.

“I am not so indifferent to her as she believes,” thought he to himself.
“I do not give up hope.”

Before a quarter of an hour was over, he had fallen into a way of
conversing with quiet sarcasm; speaking of life in London and life in
the country, as if he were conscious of his second mocking self, and
afraid of his own satire. Mr. Hale was puzzled. His visitor was a
different man to what he had seen him before at the wedding-breakfast,
and at dinner to-day; a lighter, cleverer, more worldly man, and, as
such, dissonant to Mr. Hale. It was a relief to all three when Mr.
Lennox said that he must go directly if he meant to catch the five
o’clock train. They proceeded to the house to find Mrs. Hale, and wish
her good-bye. At the last moment, Henry Lennox’s real self broke through
the crust.

“Margaret, don’t despise me; I have a heart, notwithstanding all this
good-for-nothing way of talking. As a proof of it, I believe I love you
more than ever—if I do not hate you—for the disdain with which you
have listened to me during this last half-hour. Good-bye,
Margaret—Margaret!”




CHAPTER IV.

DOUBTS AND DIFFICULTIES.

    “Cast me upon some naked shore,
    Where I may tracke
    Only the print of some sad wracke,
    If thou be there though the seas roare,
    I shall no gentler calm implore.”
              HABINGTON.


He was gone. The house was shut up for the evening. No more deep blue
skies or crimson and amber tints. Margaret went up to dress for the
early tea, finding Dixon in a pretty temper from the interruption which
a visitor had naturally occasioned on a busy day. She showed it by
brushing away viciously at Margaret’s hair, under pretence of being in a
great hurry to go to Mrs. Hale. Yet, after all, Margaret had to wait a
long time in the drawing-room before her mother came down. She sat by
herself at the fire, with unlighted candles on the table behind her,
thinking over the day, the happy walk, happy sketching, cheerful
pleasant dinner, and the uncomfortable, miserable walk in the garden.

How different men were to women! Here was she disturbed and unhappy,
because her instinct had made anything but a refusal impossible; while
he, not many minutes after he had met with a rejection of what ought to
have been the deepest, holiest proposal of his life, could speak as if
briefs, success, and all its superficial consequences of a good house,
clever and agreeable society, were the sole avowed objects of his
desires. Oh dear! how she could have loved him if he had but been
different, with a difference which she felt, on reflection, to be one
that went low—deep down. Then she took it into her head that, after
all, his lightness might be but assumed, to cover a bitterness of
disappointment which would have been stamped on her own heart if she had
loved and been rejected.

Her mother came into the room before this whirl of thoughts was adjusted
into anything like order. Margaret had to shake off the recollections of
what had been done and said through the day, and turn a sympathising
listener to the account of how Dixon had complained that the
ironing-blanket had been burnt again; and how Susan Lightfoot had been
seen with artificial flowers in her bonnet, thereby giving evidence of a
vain and giddy character. Mr. Hale sipped his tea in abstracted silence;
Margaret had the responses all to herself. She wondered how her father
and mother could be so forgetful, so regardless of their companion
through the day, as never to mention his name. She forgot that he had
not made them an offer.

After tea Mr. Hale got up, and stood with his elbow on the
chimney-piece, leaning his head on his hand, musing over something, and
from time to time sighing deeply. Mrs. Hale went out to consult with
Dixon about some winter clothing for the poor. Margaret was preparing
her mother’s worsted work, and rather shrinking from the thought of the
long evening, and wishing bed-time were come that she might go over the
events of the day again.

“Margaret!” said Mr. Hale, at last, in a sort of sudden desperate way,
that made her start. “Is that tapestry thing of immediate consequence? I
mean, can you leave it and come into my study? I want to speak to you
about something very serious to us all.”

“Very serious to us all.” Mr. Lennox had never had the opportunity of
having any private conversation with her father after her refusal, or
else that would indeed be a very serious affair. In the first place,
Margaret felt guilty and ashamed of having grown so much into a woman as
to be thought of in marriage; and secondly, she did not know if her
father might not be displeased that she had taken upon herself to
decline Mr. Lennox’s proposal. But she soon felt it was not about
anything, which having only lately and suddenly occurred, could have
given rise to any complicated thoughts, that her father wished to speak
to her. He made her take a chair by him; he stirred the fire, snuffed
the candles, and sighed once or twice before he could make up his mind
to say—and it came out with a jerk after all—“Margaret! I am going to
leave Helstone.”

“Leave Helstone, papa! But why?”

Mr. Hale did not answer for a minute or two. He played with some papers
on the table in a nervous and confused manner, opening his lips to speak
several times, but closing them again without having the courage to
utter a word. Margaret could not bear the sight of the suspense, which
was even more distressing to her father than to herself.

“But why, dear papa? Do tell me!”

He looked up at her suddenly, and then said with a slow and enforced
calmness,

“Because I must no longer be a minister in the Church of England.”

Margaret had imagined nothing less than that some of the preferments
which her mother had so much desired had befallen her father at
last—something that would force him to leave beautiful, beloved
Helstone, and perhaps compel him to go and live in some of the stately
and silent Closes which Margaret had seen from time to time in Cathedral
towns. They were grand and imposing places, but if, to go there, it was
necessary to leave Helstone as a home for ever, that would have been a
sad, long, lingering pain. But nothing to the shock she received from
Mr. Hale’s last speech. What could he mean? It was all the worse for
being so mysterious. The aspect of piteous distress on his face, almost
imploring a merciful and kind judgment from his child, gave her a sudden
sickening. Could he have become implicated in anything Frederick had
done? Frederick was an outlaw. Had her father, out of a natural love for
his son, connived at any—

“Oh! what is it? do speak, papa! tell me all! Why can you no longer be a
clergyman? Surely, if the bishop were told all we know about Frederick,
and the hard unjust—”

“It is nothing about Frederick; the bishop would have nothing to do with
that. It is all myself. Margaret, I will tell you about it. I will
answer any questions this once, but after to-night let us never speak of
it again. I can meet the consequences of my painful, miserable doubts;
but it is an effort beyond me to speak of what has caused me so much
suffering.”

“Doubts, papa! Doubts as to religion?” asked Margaret, more shocked than
ever.

“No! not doubts as to religion; not the slightest injury to that.”

He paused. Margaret sighed, as if standing on the verge of some new
horror. He began again, speaking rapidly, as if to get over a set task:

“You could not understand it all, if I told you—my anxiety, for years
past, to know whether I had any right to hold my living—my efforts to
quench my smouldering doubts by the authority of the Church. Oh!
Margaret, how I love the holy Church from which I am to be shut out!” He
could not go on for a moment or two. Margaret could not tell what to
say; it seemed to her as terribly mysterious as if her father were about
to turn Mahometan.

“I have been reading to-day of the two thousand who were ejected from
their churches,”—continued Mr. Hale, smiling faintly,—“trying to steal
some of their bravery; but it is of no use—no use—I cannot help
feeling it acutely.”

“But, papa, have you well considered? Oh! it seems so terrible, so
shocking,” said Margaret, suddenly bursting into tears. The one staid
foundation of her home, of her idea of her beloved father, seemed
reeling and rocking. What could she say? What was to be done? The sight
of her distress made Mr. Hale nerve himself, in order to try and comfort
her. He swallowed down the dry choking sobs which had been heaving up
from his heart hitherto, and going to his bookcase he took down a
volume, which he had often been reading lately, and from which he
thought he had derived strength to enter upon the course in which he was
now embarked.

“Listen, dear Margaret,” said he, putting one arm round her waist. She
took his hand in hers and grasped it tight, but she could not lift up
her head; nor indeed could she attend to what he read, so great was her
internal agitation.

“This is the soliloquy of one who was once a clergyman in a country
parish, like me; it was written by Mr. Oldfield, minister of Carsington,
in Derbyshire, a hundred and sixty years ago, or more. His trials are
over. He fought the good fight.” These last two sentences he spoke low,
as if to himself. Then he read aloud,—

“When thou canst no longer continue in thy work without dishonour to
God, discredit to religion, foregoing thy integrity, wounding
conscience, spoiling thy peace, and hazarding the loss of thy salvation;
in a word, when the conditions upon which thou must continue (if thou
wilt continue) in thy employments are sinful, and unwarranted by the
word of God, thou mayest, yea, thou must believe that God will turn thy
very silence, suspension, deprivation, and laying aside, to His glory,
and the advancement of the Gospel’s interest. When God will not use thee
in one kind, yet He will in another. A soul that desires to serve and
honour Him shall never want opportunity to do it; nor must thou so limit
the Holy One of Israel, as to think He hath but one way in which He can
glorify Himself by thee. He can do it by thy silence as well as by thy
preaching; the laying aside as well as thy continuance in thy work. It
is not pretence of doing God the greatest service, or performing the
weightiest duty, that will excuse the least sin, though that sin
capacitated or gave us the opportunity for doing that duty. Thou wilt
have little thanks, O my soul! if, when thou art charged with corrupting
God’s worship, falsifying thy vows, thou pretendest a necessity for it
in order to a continuance in the ministry.”

As he read this, and glanced at much more which he did not read, he
gained resolution for himself, and felt as if he too could be brave and
firm in doing what he believed to be right; but as he ceased he heard
Margaret’s low convulsive sob; and his courage sank down under the keen
sense of suffering.

“Margaret, dear!” said he, drawing her closer, “think of the early
martyrs; think of the thousands who have suffered.”

“But, father,” said she, suddenly lifting up her flushed, tear-wet face,
“the early martyrs suffered for the truth, while you—oh! dear, dear
papa!”

“I suffer for conscience’ sake, my child,” said he, with a dignity that
was only tremulous from the acute sensitiveness of his character; “I
must do what my conscience bids. I have borne long with self-reproach
that would have roused any mind less torpid and cowardly than mine.” He
shook his head as he went on. “Your poor mother’s fond wish, gratified
at last in the mocking way in which over-fond wishes are too often
fulfilled—Sodom apples as they are—has brought on this crisis, for
which I ought to be, and I hope I am thankful. It is not a month since
the bishop offered me another living; if I had accepted it, I should
have had to make a fresh declaration of conformity to the Liturgy at my
institution. Margaret, I tried to do it; I tried to content myself with
simply refusing the additional preferment, and stopping quietly
here,—strangling my conscience now, as I had strained it before. God
forgive me!”

He rose and walked up and down the room, speaking low words of
self-reproach and humiliation, of which Margaret was thankful to hear
but few. At last he said,

“Margaret, I return to the old sad burden: we must leave Helstone.”

“Yes! I see. But when?”

“I have written to the bishop—I dare say I have told you so, but I
forget things just now,” said Mr. Hale, collapsing into his depressed
manner as soon as he came to talk of hard matter-of-fact details,
“informing him of my intention to resign this vicarage. He has been most
kind; he has used arguments and expostulations, all in vain—in vain.
They are but what I have tried upon myself, without avail. I shall have
to take my deed of resignation, and wait upon the bishop myself, to bid
him farewell. That will be a trial. But worse, far worse, will be the
parting from my dear people. There is a curate appointed to read
prayers—a Mr. Brown. He will come to stay with us to-morrow. Next
Sunday I preach my farewell sermon.”

Was it to be so sudden then? thought Margaret; and yet perhaps it was as
well. Lingering would only add stings to the pain; it was better to be
stunned into numbness by hearing of all these arrangements, which seemed
to be nearly completed before she had been told. “What does mamma say?”
asked she, with a deep sigh.

To her surprise, her father began to walk about again before he
answered. At length he stopped and replied:

“Margaret, I am a poor coward after all. I cannot bear to give pain. I
know so well your mother’s married life has not been all she hoped—all
she had a right to expect—and this will be such a blow to her, that I
have never had the heart, the power to tell her. She must be told
though, now,” said he, looking wistfully at his daughter. Margaret was
almost overpowered with the idea that her mother knew nothing of it all,
and yet the affair was so far advanced!

“Yes, indeed she must,” said Margaret. “Perhaps, after all, she may
not—Oh yes! she will, she must be shocked”—as the force of the blow
returned upon herself in trying to realise how another would take it.
“Where are we to go to?” said she at last, struck with a fresh wonder as
to their future plans, if plans indeed her father had.

“To Milton-Northern,” he answered, with a dull indifference, for he had
perceived that, although his daughter’s love had made her cling to him,
and for a moment strive to soothe him with her love, yet the keenness of
the pain was as fresh as ever in her mind.

“Milton-Northern! The manufacturing town in Darkshire?”

“Yes,” said he, in the same despondent, indifferent way.

“Why there, papa?” asked she.

“Because there I can earn bread for my family. Because I know no one
there, and no one knows Helstone, or can ever talk to me about it.”

“Bread for your family! I thought you and mamma had”—and then she
stopped, checking her natural interest regarding their future life, as
she saw the gathering gloom on her father’s brow. But he, with his quick
intuitive sympathy, read in her face, as in a mirror, the reflections of
his own moody depression, and turned it off with an effort.

“You shall be told all, Margaret. Only help me to tell your mother. I
think I could do anything but that: the idea of her distress turns me
sick with dread. If I tell you all, perhaps you could break it to her
to-morrow. I am going out for the day, to bid farmer Dobson and the poor
people on Bracy Common good-bye. Would you dislike breaking it to her
very much, Margaret?”

Margaret did dislike it, did shrink from it more than from anything she
had ever had to do in her life before. She could not speak, all at once.
Her father said, “You dislike it very much don’t you, Margaret?” Then
she conquered herself, and said, with a bright strong look on her face:

“It is a painful thing, but it must be done, and I will do it as well as
ever I can. You must have many painful things to do.”

Mr. Hale shook his head despondingly: he pressed her hand in token of
gratitude. Margaret was nearly upset again into a burst of crying. To
turn her thoughts, she said: “Now tell me, papa, what our plans are.
You and mamma have some money, independent of the income from the
living, have you not? Aunt Shaw has, I know.”

“Yes. I suppose we have about a hundred and twenty pounds a year of our
own. Seventy of that has always gone to Frederick, since he has been
abroad. I don’t know if he wants it all,” he continued in a hesitating
manner. “He must have some pay for serving with the Spanish army.”

“Frederick must not suffer,” said Margaret, decidedly; “in a foreign
country; so unjustly treated by his own. A hundred is left. Could not
you, and I, and mamma live on a hundred a year in some very cheap—very
quiet part of England? Oh! I think we could.”

“No!” said Mr. Hale. “That would not answer. I must do something! I must
make myself busy, to keep off morbid thoughts. Besides, in a country
parish I should be so painfully reminded of Helstone, and my duties
here. I could not bear it, Margaret. And a hundred a year would go a
very little way, after the necessary wants of housekeeping are met,
towards providing your mother with all the comforts she has been
accustomed to, and ought to have. No: we must go to Milton. That is
settled. I can always decide better by myself, and not influenced by
those whom I love,” said he, as a half apology for having arranged so
much before he had told any one of his family of his intentions. “I
cannot stand objections. They make me so undecided.”

Margaret resolved to keep silence. After all, what did it signify where
they went, compared to the one terrible change?

Mr. Hale continued: “A few months ago, when my misery of doubt became
more than I could bear without speaking, I wrote to Mr. Bell—you
remember Mr. Bell, Margaret?”

“No; I never saw him, I think. But I know who he is. Frederick’s
godfather—your old tutor at Oxford, don’t you mean?”

“Yes. He is a Fellow of Plymouth College there. He is a native of
Milton-Northern, I believe. At any rate he has property there, which has
very much increased in value since Milton has become such a large
manufacturing town. Well; I had reason to suspect—to imagine—I had
better say nothing about it, however. But I felt sure of sympathy from
Mr. Bell. I don’t know that he gave me much strength. He has lived an
easy life in his college all his days. But he has been as kind as can
be. And it is owing to him we are going to Milton.”

“How?” said Margaret.

“Why he has tenants, and houses, and mills there; so, though he dislikes
the place—too bustling for one of his habits—he is obliged to keep up
some sort of connection; and he tells me that he hears there is a good
opening for a private tutor there.”

“A private tutor!” said Margaret, looking scornful: “What in the world
do manufacturers want with the classics, or literature, or the
accomplishments of a gentleman?”

“Oh,” said her father, “some of them really seem to be fine fellows,
conscious of their own deficiencies, which is more than many a man at
Oxford is. Some want resolutely to learn, though they have come to man’s
estate. Some want their children to be better instructed than they
themselves have been. At any rate, there is an opening, as I have said,
for a private tutor. Mr. Bell has recommended me to a Mr. Thornton, a
tenant of his, and a very intelligent man, as far as I can judge from
his letters. And in Milton, Margaret, I shall find a busy life, if not a
happy one, and people and scenes so different that I shall never be
reminded of Helstone.”

There was the secret motive, as Margaret knew from her own feelings. It
would be different. Discordant as it was—with almost a detestation for
all she had ever heard of the North of England, the manufacturers,
the people, the wild and bleak country—there was this one
recommendation—it would be different to Helstone, and could never
remind them of that beloved place.

“When do we go?” asked Margaret, after a short silence.

“I do not know exactly. I wanted to talk it over with you. You see, your
mother knows nothing about it yet: but I think, in a fortnight;—after
my deed of resignation is sent in, I shall have no right to remain.”

Margaret was almost stunned.

“In a fortnight!”

“No—no, not exactly to a day. Nothing is fixed,” said her father, with
anxious hesitation, as he noticed the filmy sorrow that came over her
eyes, and the sudden change in her complexion. But she recovered herself
immediately.

“Yes, papa, it had better be fixed soon and decidedly, as you say. Only
mamma to know nothing about it! It is that that is the great
perplexity.”

“Poor Maria!” replied Mr. Hale tenderly. “Poor, poor Maria! Oh, if I
were not married—if I were but myself in the world, how easy it would
be! As it is—Margaret, I dare not tell her!”

“No,” said Margaret, sadly, “I will do it. Give me till to-morrow
evening to choose my time. Oh, papa,” cried she with sudden passionate
entreaty, “say—tell me it is a nightmare—a horrid dream—not the real
waking truth! You cannot mean that you are really going to leave the
Church—to give up Helstone—to be for ever separate from me, from
mamma—led away by some delusion—some temptation! You do not really
mean it!”

Mr. Hale sat in rigid stillness while she spoke.

Then he looked her in the face, and said in a slow, hoarse, measured
way—“I do mean it, Margaret. You must not deceive yourself in doubting
the reality of my words—my fixed intention and resolve.” He looked at
her in the same steady, stony manner, for some moments after he had done
speaking. She, too, gazed back with pleading eyes before she would
believe it was irrevocable. Then she arose and went, without another
word or look, towards the door. As her fingers were on the handle he
called her back. He was standing by the fireplace, shrunk and stooping;
but as she came near he drew himself up to his full height, and, placing
his hands on her head, he said, solemnly:

“The blessing of God be upon thee, my child!”

“And may He restore you to His Church,” responded she, out of the
fulness of her heart. The next moment she feared lest this answer to his
blessing might be irreverent, wrong—might hurt him as coming from his
daughter, and she threw her arms round his neck. He held her to him for
a minute or two. She heard him murmur to himself, “The martyrs and
confessors had even more pain to bear—I will not shrink.”

They were startled by hearing Mrs. Hale inquiring for her daughter. They
started asunder in the full consciousness of all that was before them.
Mr. Hale hurriedly said, “Go, Margaret, go. I shall be out all to-morrow.
Before night you will have told your mother.”

“Yes,” she replied, and she returned to the drawing-room in a stunned
and dizzy state.




CHAPTER V.

DECISION.

    “I ask Thee for a thoughtful love,
      Through constant watching wise,
    To meet the glad with joyful smiles,
      And to wipe the weeping eyes;
    And a heart at leisure from itself
      To soothe and sympathise.”
                  ANON.


Margaret made a good listener to all her mother’s little plans for
adding some small comforts to the lot of the poorest parishioners. She
could not help listening, though each new project was a stab to her
heart. By the time the frost had set in, they should be far away from
Helstone. Old Simon’s rheumatism might be bad and his eyesight worse;
there would be no one to go and read to him, and comfort him with little
porringers of broth and good red flannel; or if there was, it would be a
stranger, and the old man would watch in vain for her. Mary Domville’s
little crippled boy would crawl in vain to the door and look for her
coming through the forest. These poor friends would never understand why
she had forsaken them; and there were many others besides. “Papa has
always spent the income he derived from his living in the parish. I am,
perhaps, encroaching upon the next dues, but the winter is likely to be
severe, and our poor people must be helped.”

“Oh, mamma, let us do all we can,” said Margaret eagerly, not seeing the
prudential side of the question, only grasping at the idea that they
were rendering such help for the last time; “we may not be here long.”

“Do you feel ill, my darling?” asks Mrs. Hale, anxiously,
misunderstanding Margaret’s hint of the uncertainty of their stay at
Helstone. “You look pale and tired. It is this soft, damp, unhealthy
air.”

“No—no, mamma, it is not that: it is delicious air. It smells of the
freshest, purest fragrance, after the smokiness of Harley Street. But I
am tired: it surely must be near bedtime.”

“Not far off—it is half-past nine. You had better go to bed at once,
dear. Ask Dixon for some gruel. I will come and see you as soon as you
are in bed. I am afraid you have taken cold; or the bad air from some of
the stagnant ponds—”

“Oh, mamma,” said Margaret, faintly smiling as she kissed her mother, “I
am quite well—don’t alarm yourself about me; I am only tired.”

Margaret went up stairs. To soothe her mother’s anxiety she submitted to
a basin of gruel. She was lying languidly in bed when Mrs. Hale came up
to make some last inquiries and kiss her before going to her own room
for the night. But the instant she heard her mother’s door locked, she
sprang out of bed, and throwing her dressing-gown on, she began to pace
up and down the room, until the creaking of one of the boards reminded
her that she must make no noise. She went and curled herself upon the
window-seat in the small, deeply-recessed window. That morning when she
had looked out, her heart had danced at seeing the bright clear lights
on the church tower, which foretold a fine and sunny day. This
evening—sixteen hours at most had past by—she sat down, too full of
sorrow to cry, but with a cold dull pain, which seemed to have pressed
the youth and buoyancy out of her heart, never to return. Mr. Henry
Lennox’s visit—his offer—was like a dream, a thing beside her actual
life. The hard reality was, that her father had so admitted tempting
doubts into his mind as to become a schismatic—an outcast; all the
changes consequent upon this grouped themselves around that one great
blighting fact.

She looked out upon the dark-grey lines of the church towers, square and
straight in the centre of the view, cutting against the deep blue
transparent depths beyond, into which she gazed, and felt that she might
gaze for ever, seeing at every moment some farther distance, and yet no
sign of God! It seemed to her at the moment, as if the earth was more
utterly desolate than if girt in by an iron dome, behind which there
might be the ineffaceable peace and glory of the Almighty: those
never-ending depths of space, in their still serenity, were more mocking
to her than any material bounds could be—shutting in the cries of
earth’s sufferers, which now might ascend into that infinite splendour
of vastness and be lost—lost for ever, before they reached His throne.
In this mood her father came in unheard. The moonlight was strong enough
to let him see his daughter in her unusual place and attitude. He came
to her and touched her shoulder before she was aware that he was there.

“Margaret, I heard you were up. I could not help coming in to ask you to
pray with me—to say the Lord’s Prayer; that will do good to both of
us.”

Mr. Hale and Margaret knelt by the window-seat—he looking up, she
bowed down in humble shame. God was there, close around them, hearing
her father’s whispered words. Her father might be a heretic; but had not
she, in her despairing doubts not five minutes before, shown herself a
far more utter sceptic? She spoke not a word, but stole to bed after her
father had left her, like a child ashamed of its fault. If the world was
full of perplexing problems she would trust, and only ask to see the one
step needful for the hour. Mr. Lennox—his visit, his proposal—the
remembrance of which had been so rudely pushed aside by the subsequent
events of the day—haunted her dreams that night. He was climbing up
some tree of fabulous height to reach the branch whereon was slung her
bonnet: he was falling and she was struggling to save him, but held back
by some invisible powerful hand. He was dead. And yet, with a shifting
of the scene, she was once more in the Harley Street drawing-room,
talking to him as of old, and still with a consciousness all the time
that she had seen him killed by that terrible fall.

Miserable, unresting night! Ill preparation for the coming day! She
awoke with a start, unrefreshed, and conscious of some reality worse
even than her feverish dreams. It all came back upon her; not merely the
sorrow, but the terrible discord in the sorrow. Where, to what distance
apart, had her father wandered, led by doubts which were to her
temptations of the Evil One? She longed to ask, and yet would not have
heard for all the world.

The fine crisp morning made her mother feel particularly well and happy
at breakfast-time. She talked on, planning village kindness, unheeding
the silence of her husband and the monosyllabic answers of Margaret.
Before the things were cleared away, Mr. Hale got up; he leaned one hand
on the table, as if to support himself:

“I shall not be home till evening. I am going to Bracy Common, and will
ask Farmer Dobson to give me something for dinner. I shall be back to
tea at seven.”

He did not look at either of them, but Margaret knew what he meant. By
seven the announcement must be made to her mother. Mr. Hale would have
delayed making it, but Margaret was of different stuff. She could not
bear the impending weight on her mind all day long: better get the worst
over; the day would be too short to comfort her mother. But while she
stood by the window, thinking how to begin, and waiting for the servant
to have left the room, her mother had gone up stairs to put on her
things to go to the school. She came down ready equipped, in a brisker
mood than usual.

“Mother, come round the garden with me this morning; just one turn,”
said Margaret, putting her arm round Mrs. Hale’s waist.

They passed through the open window. Mrs. Hale spoke—said
something—Margaret could not tell what. Her eye caught on a bee
entering a deep-belled flower: when that bee flew forth with his spoil
she would begin—that should be the sign. Out he came.

“Mamma! Papa is going to leave Helstone!” she blurted forth. “He’s going
to leave the Church, and live in Milton-Northern.” There were the three
hard facts hardly spoken.

“What makes you say so?” asked Mrs. Hale, in a surprised, incredulous
voice. “Who has been telling you such nonsense?”

“Papa himself,” said Margaret, longing to say something gentle and
consoling, but literally not knowing how. They were close to a
garden-bench. Mrs. Hale sat down and began to cry.

“I don’t understand you,” she said. “Either you have made some great
mistake, or I don’t quite understand you.”

“No, mother, I have made no mistake. Papa has written to the bishop,
saying that he has such doubts that he cannot conscientiously remain a
priest of the Church of England, and that he must give up Helstone. He
has also consulted Mr. Bell—Frederick’s godfather, you know, mamma; and
it is arranged that we go to live at Milton-Northern.” Mrs. Hale looked
up in Margaret’s face all the time she was speaking these words: the
shadow on her countenance told that she, at least, believed in the truth
of what she said.

“I don’t think it can be true,” said Mrs. Hale, at length. “He would
surely have told me before it came to this.”

It came strongly upon Margaret’s mind that her mother ought to have been
told: that whatever her faults of discontent and repining might have
been, it was an error in her father to have left her to learn his change
of opinion, and his approaching change of life, from her better-informed
child. Margaret sat down by her mother, and took her unresisting head on
her breast, bending her own soft cheeks down caressingly to touch her
face.

“Dear, darling mamma! we were so afraid of giving you pain. Papa felt so
acutely—you know you are not strong, and there must have been such
terrible suspense to go through.”

“When did he tell you, Margaret?”

“Yesterday, only yesterday,” replied Margaret, detecting the jealousy
which prompted the inquiry. “Poor papa!”—trying to divert her mother’s
thoughts into compassionate sympathy for all her father had gone
through. Mrs. Hale raised her head.

“What does he mean by having doubts?” she asked. “Surely, he does not
mean that he thinks differently—that he knows better than the Church.”

Margaret shook her head, and the tears came into her eyes, as her mother
touched the bare nerve of her own regret.

“Can’t the bishop set him right?” asked Mrs. Hale half impatiently.

“I’m afraid not,” said Margaret. “But I did not ask. I could not bear to
hear what he might answer. It is all settled at any rate. He is going to
leave Helstone in a fortnight. I am not sure if he did not say he had
sent in his deed of resignation.”

“In a fortnight!” exclaimed Mrs. Hale, “I do think this is very
strange—not at all right. I call it very unfeeling,” said she,
beginning to take relief in tears. “He has doubts you say, and gives up
his living, and all without consulting me. I dare say, if he had told me
his doubts at the first I could have nipped them in the bud.”

Mistaken as Margaret felt her father’s conduct to have been, she could
not bear to hear it blamed by her mother. She knew that his very
reserve had originated in a tenderness for her, which might be cowardly,
but was not unfeeling.

“I almost hoped you might be glad to leave Helstone, mamma,” said she,
after a pause. “You have never been well in this air, you know.”

“You can’t think the smoky air of a manufacturing town, all chimneys and
dirt like Milton-Northern, would be better than this air, which is pure
and sweet, if it is too soft and relaxing. Fancy living in the middle of
factories, and factory people! Though, of course, if your father leaves
the Church, we shall not be admitted into society anywhere. It will be
such a disgrace to us! Poor dear Sir John! It is well he is not alive to
see what your father has come to! Every day after dinner, when I was a
girl, living with your Aunt Shaw, at Beresford Court, Sir John used to
give for the first toast—‘Church and King, and down with the Rump.’”

Margaret was glad that her mother’s thoughts were turned away from the
fact of her husband’s silence to her on the point which must have been
so near his heart. Next to the serious vital anxiety as to the nature of
her father’s doubts, this was the one circumstance of the case that gave
Margaret the most pain.

“You know, we have very little society here, mamma. The Gormans, who are
our nearest neighbours (to call society—and we hardly ever see them),
have been in trade just as much as these Milton-Northern people.”

“Yes,” says Mrs. Hale, almost indignantly, “but at any rate, the Gormans
made carriages for half the gentlemen of the county, and were brought
into some kind of intercourse with them; but these factory people, who
on earth wears cotton that can afford linen?”

“Well, mamma, I give up the cotton-spinners; I am not standing up for
them, any more than for any other trades-people. Only we shall have
little enough to do with them.”

“Why on earth has your father fixed on Milton-Northern to live in?”

“Partly,” said Margaret, sighing, “because it is so very different from
Helstone—partly because Mr. Bell says there is an opening there for a
private tutor.”

“Private tutor in Milton! Why can’t he go to Oxford, and be a tutor to
gentlemen?”

“You forget, mamma! He is leaving the Church on account of his
opinions—his doubts would do him no good at Oxford.”

Mrs. Hale was silent for some time, quietly crying. At last she said:—

“And the furniture—How in the world are we to manage the removal? I
never removed in my life, and only a fortnight to think about it!”

Margaret was inexpressibly relieved to find that her mother’s anxiety
and distress was lowered to this point, so insignificant to herself, and
on which she could do so much to help. She planned and promised, and led
her mother on to arrange fully as much as could be fixed before they
knew somewhat more definitely what Mr. Hale intended to do. Throughout
the day Margaret never left her mother; bending her whole soul to
sympathise in all the various turns her feelings took; towards evening
especially, as she became more and more anxious that her father should
find a soothing welcome home awaiting him, after his return from his day
of fatigue and distress. She dwelt upon what he must have borne in
secret for long; her mother only replied coldly that he ought to have
told her, and that then at any rate he would have had an adviser to give
him counsel; and Margaret turned faint at heart when she heard her
father’s step in the hall. She dared not go to meet him, and tell him
what she had done all day, for fear of her mother’s jealous annoyance.
She heard him linger, as if awaiting her, or some sign of her; and she
dared not stir; she saw by her mother’s twitching lips, and changing
colour, that she too was aware that her husband had returned. Presently
he opened the room-door, and stood there uncertain whether to come in.
His face was gray and pale; he had a timid fearful look in his eyes;
something almost pitiful to see in a man’s face; but that look of
despondent uncertainty, of mental and bodily languor, touched his wife’s
heart. She went to him, and threw herself on his breast, crying out:—

“Oh! Richard, Richard, you should have told me sooner!”

And then, in tears, Margaret left her, as she rushed up stairs to throw
herself on her bed, and hide her face in the pillows to stifle the
hysteric sobs that would force their way out at last, after the rigid
self-control of the whole day.

How long she lay thus she could not tell. She heard no noise, though the
housemaid came in to arrange the room. The affrighted girl stole out
again on tip-toe, and went and told Mrs. Dixon that Miss Hale was crying
as if her heart would break: she was sure she would make herself deadly
ill if she went on at that rate. In consequence of this, Margaret felt
herself touched, and started up into a sitting posture; she saw the
accustomed room, the figure of Dixon in shadow, as the latter stood
holding a candle a little behind her, for fear of the effect on Miss
Hale’s startled eyes, swollen and blinded as they were.

“Oh, Dixon! I did not hear you come into the room!” said Margaret,
resuming her trembling self-restraint. “Is it very late?” continued she,
lifting herself languidly off the bed, yet letting her feet touch the
ground without fairly standing down, as she shaded her wet ruffled hair
off her face, and tried to look as though nothing were the matter; as if
she had been asleep.

“I can hardly tell what time it is,” replied Dixon in an aggrieved tone
of voice. “Since your mamma told me this terrible news, when I dressed
her for tea, I’ve lost all count of time. I’m sure I don’t know what is
to become of us all. When Charlotte told me just now you were sobbing,
Miss Hale, I thought, no wonder, poor thing! And master thinking of
turning Dissenter at his time of life, when, if it is not to be said
he’s done well in the Church, he’s not done badly after all. I had a
cousin, miss, who turned Methodist preacher after he was fifty years of
age, and a tailor all his life; but then he had never been able to make
a pair of trousers to fit, for as long as he had been in the trade, so
it was no wonder; but for master! as I said to missus, ‘What would poor
Sir John have said? he never liked your marrying Mr. Hale, but if he
could have known it would have come to this, he would have sworn worse
oaths than ever, if that was possible!’”

Dixon had been so much accustomed to comment upon Mr. Hale’s proceedings
to her mistress (who listened to her, or not, as she was in the humour),
that she never noticed Margaret’s flashing eye and dilating nostril. To
hear her father talked of in this way by a servant to her face!

“Dixon,” she said, in the low tone she always used when much excited,
which had a sound in it as of some distant turmoil, or threatening storm
breaking far away. “Dixon! you forget to whom you are speaking.” She
stood upright and firm on her feet now, confronting the waiting-maid,
and fixing her with her steady discerning eye. “I am Mr. Hale’s
daughter. Go! You have made a strange mistake, and one that I am sure
your own good feeling will make you sorry for when you think about it.”

Dixon hung irresolutely about the room for a minute or two. Margaret
repeated, “You may leave me, Dixon. I wish you to go.” Dixon did not
know whether to resent these decided words or to cry; either course
would have suited her mistress: but as she said to herself, “Miss
Margaret has a touch of the old gentleman about her, as well as poor
Master Frederick; I wonder where they get it from?” and she, who would
have resented such words from any one less haughty and determined in
manner, was subdued enough to say, in a half humble, half injured tone:

“Mayn’t I unfasten your gown, miss, and do your hair?”

“No! not to-night, thank you.” And Margaret gravely lighted her out of
the room, and bolted the door. From henceforth Dixon obeyed and admired
Margaret. She said it was because she was so like poor Master Frederick;
but the truth was, that Dixon, as do many others, liked to feel herself
ruled by a powerful and decided nature.

Margaret needed all Dixon’s help in action, and silence in words; for,
for some time, the latter thought it her duty to show her sense of
affront by saying as little as possible to her young lady; so the energy
came out in doing rather than in speaking. A fortnight was a very short
time to make arrangements for so serious a removal; as Dixon said,
“Anyone but a gentleman—indeed almost any other gentleman—” but
catching a look at Margaret’s straight, stern brow just here, she
coughed the remainder of the sentence away, and meekly took the
horehound drop that Margaret offered her, to stop the “little tickling
at my chest, miss.” But almost any one but Mr. Hale would have had
practical knowledge enough to see, that in so short a time it would be
difficult to fix on any house in Milton-Northern, or indeed elsewhere,
to which they could remove the furniture that had of necessity been
taken out of Helstone Vicarage.

Mrs. Hale, overpowered by all the troubles and necessities for
immediate household decisions that seemed to come upon her at once,
became really ill, and Margaret almost felt it as a relief when her
mother fairly took to her bed, and left the management of affairs to
her. Dixon, true to her post of body-guard, attended most faithfully to
her mistress, and only emerged from Mrs. Hale’s bedroom to shake her
head, and murmur to herself in a manner which Margaret did not choose to
hear. For, the one thing clear and straight before her, was the
necessity for leaving Helstone. Mr. Hale’s successor in the living was
appointed; and, at any rate, after her father’s decision, there must be
no lingering now, for his sake, as well as from every other
consideration. For he came home every evening more and more depressed,
after the necessary leave-taking which he had resolved to have with
every individual parishioner. Margaret, inexperienced as she was in all
the necessary matter-of-fact business to be got through, did not know to
whom to apply for advice. The cook and Charlotte worked away with
willing arms and stout hearts at all the moving and packing; and as far
as that went, Margaret’s admirable sense enabled her to see what was
best, and to direct how it should be done. But where were they to go to?
In a week they must be gone. Straight to Milton, or where? So many
arrangements depended on this precision that Margaret resolved to ask
her father one evening, in spite of his evident fatigue and low spirits.
He answered:

“My dear! I have really had too much to think about to settle this. What
does your mother say? What does she wish? Poor Maria!”

He met with an echo even louder than his sigh. Dixon had just come into
the room for another cup of tea for Mrs. Hale, and catching Mr. Hale’s
last words, and protected by his presence from Margaret’s upbraiding
eyes, made bold to say, “My poor mistress!”

“You don’t think her worse to-day,” said Mr. Hale, turning hastily.

“I am sure I can’t say, sir. It’s not for me to judge. The illness seems
so much more on the mind than on the body.”

Mr. Hale looked infinitely distressed.

“You had better take mamma her tea while it is hot, Dixon,” said
Margaret, in a tone of quiet authority.

“Oh! I beg your pardon, Miss! My thoughts was otherwise occupied in
thinking of my poor—— of Mrs. Hale.”

“Papa!” said Margaret, “it is this suspense that is bad for you both. Of
course, mamma must feel your change of opinions: we can’t help that,”
she continued softly; “but now the course is clear, at least to a
certain point. And I think, papa, that I could get mamma to help me in
planning, if you could tell me what to plan for. She has never expressed
any wish in any way, and only thinks of what can’t be helped. Are we to
go straight to Milton? Have you taken a house there?”

“No,” he replied, “I suppose we must go into lodgings, and look about
for a house.”

“And pack up the furniture so that it can be left at the railway
station, till we have met with one?”

“I suppose so. Do what you think best. Only remember, we shall have much
less money to spend.”

They had never had much superfluity, as Margaret knew. She felt that it
was a great weight suddenly thrown upon her shoulders. Four months ago,
all the decisions she needed to make were what dress she would wear for
dinner, and to help Edith to draw out the lists of who should take down
whom in the dinner parties at home. Nor was the household in which she
lived one that called for much decision. Except in the one grand case of
Captain Lennox’s offer, everything went on with the regularity of
clockwork. Once a year, there was a long discussion between her aunt and
Edith as to whether they should go to the Isle of Wight, abroad, or to
Scotland; but at such times Margaret herself was secure of drifting,
without any exertion of her own, into the quiet harbour of home. Now,
since that day when Mr. Lennox came, and startled her into a decision,
every day brought some question, momentous to her, and to those whom she
loved, to be settled.

Her father went up after tea to sit with his wife. Margaret remained
alone in the drawing-room. Suddenly she took a candle and went into her
father’s study for a great atlas, and lugging it back into the
drawing-room, she began to pore over the map of England. She was ready
to look up brightly when her father came down stairs.

“I have hit upon such a beautiful plan. Look here—in Darkshire, hardly
the breadth of my finger from Milton, is Heston, which I have often
heard of from people living in the north as such a pleasant little
bathing-place. Now, don’t you think we could get mamma there with Dixon,
while you and I go and look at houses, and get one all ready for her in
Milton? She would get a breath of sea air to set her up for the winter,
and be spared all the fatigue, and Dixon would enjoy taking care of
her.”

“Is Dixon to go with us?” asked Mr. Hale, in a kind of helpless dismay.

“Oh, yes!” said Margaret. “Dixon quite intends it, and I don’t know what
mamma would do without her.”

“But we shall have to put up with a very different way of living, I am
afraid. Everything is so much dearer in a town. I doubt if Dixon can
make herself comfortable. To tell you the truth, Margaret, I sometimes
feel as if that woman gave herself airs.”

“To be sure she does, papa,” replied Margaret; “and if she has to put up
with a different style of living, we shall have to put up with her airs,
which will be worse. But she really loves us all, and would be miserable
to leave us, I am sure—especially in this change; so, for mamma’s sake,
and for the sake of her faithfulness, I do think she must go.”

“Very well, my dear. Go on. I am resigned. How far is Heston from
Milton? The breadth of one of your fingers does not give me a very clear
idea of distance.”

“Well, then, I suppose it is thirty miles; that is not much!”

“Not in distance, but in—. Never mind! If you really think it will do
your mother good, let it be fixed so.”

This was a great step. Now Margaret could work, and act, and plan in
good earnest. And now Mrs. Hale could rouse herself from her languor,
and forget her real suffering in thinking of the pleasure and the
delight of going to the sea-side. Her only regret was that Mr. Hale
could not be with her all the fortnight she was to be there, as he had
been for a whole fortnight once, when they were engaged, and she was
staying with Sir John and Lady Beresford at Torquay.




CHAPTER VI.

FAREWELL.

    “Unwatch’d the garden bough shall sway,
        The tender blossom flutter down,
        Unloved that beech will gather brown,
    The maple burn itself away;

    Unloved, the sun-flower, shining fair,
        Ray round with flames her disk of seed,
        And many a rose-carnation feed
    With summer spice the humming air;

        *       *       *       *       *

    Till from the garden and the wild
        A fresh association blow
        And year by year the landscape grow
    Familiar to the stranger’s child;

    As year by year the labourer tills
        His wonted glebe, or lops the glades;
        And year by year our memory fades
    From all the circle of the hills.”
              TENNYSON.


The last day came; the house was full of packing-cases, which were being
carted off at the front door, to the nearest railway station. Even the
pretty lawn at the side of the house, was made unsightly and untidy by
the straw that had been wafted upon it through the open door and
windows. The rooms had a strange echoing sound in them,—and the light
came harshly and strongly in through the uncurtained windows,—seeming
already unfamiliar and strange. Mrs. Hale’s dressing-room was left
untouched to the last; and there she and Dixon were packing up clothes,
and interrupting each other every now and then to exclaim at, and turn
over with fond regard, some forgotten treasure, in the shape of some
relic of the children while they were yet little. They did not make much
progress with their work. Down-stairs, Margaret stood calm and
collected, ready to counsel or advise the men who had been called in to
help the cook and Charlotte. These two last, crying between whiles,
wondered how the young lady could keep up so this last day, and settled
it between them that she was not likely to care much for Helstone,
having been so long in London. There she stood, very pale and quiet,
with her large grave eyes observing everything—up to every present
circumstance however small. They could not understand how her heart was
aching all the time, with a heavy pressure that no sighs could lift off
or relieve, and how constant exertion for her perceptive faculties was
the only way to keep herself from crying out with pain. Moreover, if she
gave way, who was to act? Her father was examining papers, books,
registers, what not, in the vestry with the clerk; and when he came in,
there were his own books to pack up, which no one but himself could do
to his satisfaction. Besides, was Margaret one to give way before
strange men, or even household friends like the cook and Charlotte? Not
she! But at last the four packers went into the kitchen to their tea;
and Margaret moved stiffly and slowly away from the place in the hall
where she had been standing so long, out through the bare echoing
drawing-room, into the twilight of an early November evening. There was
a filmy veil of soft dull mist obscuring, but not hiding, all objects,
giving them a lilac hue, for the sun had not yet fully set; a robin was
singing,—perhaps, Margaret thought, the very robin that her father had
so often talked of as his winter pet, and for which he had made, with
his own hands, a kind of robin-house by his study-window. The leaves
were more gorgeous than ever; the first touch of frost would lay them
all low on the ground. Already one or two kept constantly floating down,
amber and golden in the low slanting sun-rays.

Margaret went along the walk under the pear-tree wall. She had never
been along it since she paced it at Henry Lennox’s side. Here, at this
bed of thyme, he began to speak of what she must not think of now. Her
eyes were on that late-blowing rose as she was trying to answer; and she
had caught the idea of the vivid beauty of the feathery leaves of the
carrots in the very middle of his last sentence. Only a fortnight ago!
And all so changed! Where was he now? In London,—going through the old
round; dining with the old Harley Street set, or with gayer young
friends of his own. Even now, while she walked sadly through that damp
and drear garden in the dusk, with everything falling and fading, and
turning to decay around her, he might be gladly putting away his
law-books after a day of satisfactory toil, and freshening himself up,
as he had told her he often did, by a run in the Temple Gardens, taking
in the while the grand inarticulate mighty roar of tens of thousands of
busy men, nigh at hand, but not seen, and catching ever, at his quick
turns, glimpses of the lights of the city coming up out of the depths of
the river. He had often spoken to Margaret of these hasty walks,
snatched in the intervals between study and dinner. At his best times
and in his best moods had he spoken of them; and the thought of them had
struck upon her fancy. Here there was no sound. The robin had gone away
into the vast stillness of night. Now and then, a cottage door in the
distance was opened and shut, as if to admit the tired labourer to his
home; but that sounded very far away. A stealthy, creeping, cranching
sound among the crisp fallen leaves of the forest, beyond the garden,
seemed almost close at hand. Margaret knew it was some poacher. Sitting
up in her bedroom this past autumn, with the light of her candle
extinguished, and purely revelling in the solemn beauty of the heavens
and the earth, she had many a time seen the light noiseless leap of the
poachers over the garden-fence, their quick tramp across the dewy
moonlit lawn, their disappearance in the black still shadow beyond. The
wild adventurous freedom of their life had taken her fancy; she felt
inclined to wish them success; she had no fear of them. But to-night she
was afraid, she knew not why. She heard Charlotte shutting the windows,
and fastening up for the night, unconscious that any one had gone out
into the garden. A small branch—it might be of rotten wood, or it might
be broken by force—came heavily down in the nearest part of the forest;
Margaret ran, swift as Camilla, down to the window, and rapped at it
with a hurried tremulousness which startled Charlotte within.

“Let me in! Let me in! It is only me, Charlotte!” Her heart did not
still its fluttering till she was safe in the drawing-room, with the
windows fastened and bolted, and the familiar walls hemming her round,
and shutting her in. She had sate down upon a packing-case; cheerless,
chill was the dreary and dismantled room—no fire, nor other light, but
Charlotte’s long unsnuffed candle. Charlotte looked at Margaret with
surprise; and Margaret, feeling it rather than seeing it, rose up.

“I was afraid you were shutting me out altogether, Charlotte,” said she,
half-smiling. “And then you would never have heard me in the kitchen,
and the doors into the lane and churchyard are locked long ago.”

“Oh, miss, I should have been sure to have missed you soon. The men
would have wanted you to tell them how to go on. And I have put tea in
master’s study, as being the most comfortable room, so to speak.”

“Thank you, Charlotte. You are a kind girl. I shall be sorry to leave
you. You must try and write to me, if I can ever give you any little
help or good advice. I shall always be glad to get a letter from
Helstone, you know. I shall be sure and send you my address when I know
it.”

The study was all ready for tea. There was a good blazing fire, and
unlighted candles on the table. Margaret sat down on the rug, partly to
warm herself, for the dampness of the evening hung about her dress, and
over-fatigue had made her chilly. She kept herself balanced by clasping
her hands together round her knees; her head dropped a little towards
her chest; the attitude was one of despondency, whatever her frame of
mind might be. But when she heard her father’s step on the gravel
outside, she started up, and hastily shaking her heavy black hair back,
and wiping a few tears away that had come on her cheeks she knew not
how, she went out to open the door for him. He showed far more
depression than she did. She could hardly get him to talk, although she
tried to speak on subjects that would interest him, at the cost of an
effort every time which she thought would be her last.

“Have you been a very long walk to-day?” asked she, on seeing his
refusal to touch food of any kind.

“As far as Fordham Beeches. I went to see Widow Maltby; she is sadly
grieved at not having wished you good-bye. She says little Susan has
kept watch down the lane for days past.—Nay, Margaret, what is the
matter, dear?” The thought of the little child watching for her, and
continually disappointed—from no forgetfulness on her part, but from
sheer inability to leave home—was the last drop in poor Margaret’s cup,
and she was sobbing away as if her heart would break. Mr. Hale was
distressingly perplexed. He rose, and walked nervously up and down the
room. Margaret tried to check herself, but would not speak until she
could do so with firmness. She heard him talking, as if to himself.

“I cannot bear it. I cannot bear to see the sufferings of others. I
think I could go through my own with patience. Oh, is there no going
back?”

“No, father,” said Margaret, looking straight at him, and speaking low
and steadily. “It is bad to believe you in error. It would be infinitely
worse to have known you a hypocrite.” She dropped her voice at the last
few words, as if entertaining the idea of hypocrisy for a moment in
connection with her father savoured of irreverence.

“Besides,” she went on, “it is only that I am tired to-night; don’t
think that I am suffering from what you have done, dear papa. We can’t
either of us talk about it to-night, I believe,” said she, finding that
tears and sobs would come in spite of herself. “I had better go and take
mamma up this cup of tea. She had hers very early, when I was too busy
to go to her, and I am sure she will be glad of another now.”

Railroad time inexorably wrenched them away from lovely, beloved
Helstone, the next morning. They were gone; they had seen the last of
the long low parsonage home, half-covered with China-roses and
pyracanthus—more homelike than ever in the morning sun that glittered
on its windows, each belonging to some well-loved room. Almost before
they had settled themselves into the car, sent from Southampton to fetch
them to the station, they were gone away to return no more. A sting at
Margaret’s heart made her strive to look out to catch the last glimpse
of the old church tower at the turn where she knew it might be seen
above a wave of the forest trees; but her father remembered this too,
and she silently acknowledged his greater right to the one window from
which it could be seen. She leant back and shut her eyes, and the tears
welled forth, and hung glittering for an instant on the shadowing
eyelashes before rolling slowly down her cheeks, and dropping, unheeded,
on her dress.

They were to stop in London all night at some quiet hotel. Poor Mrs.
Hale had cried in her way nearly all day long; and Dixon showed her
sorrow by extreme crossness, and a continual irritable attempt to keep
her petticoats from even touching the unconscious Mr. Hale, whom she
regarded as the origin of all this suffering.

They went through the well-known streets, past houses which they had
often visited, past shops in which she had lounged, impatient, by her
aunt’s side, while that lady was making some important and interminable
decision—nay, absolutely passed acquaintances in the streets; for
though the morning had been of an incalculable length to them, and they
felt as if it ought long ago to have closed in for the repose of
darkness, it was the very busiest time of a London afternoon in November
when they arrived there. It was long since Mrs. Hale had been in London;
and she roused up, almost like a child, to look about her at the
different streets, and to gaze after and exclaim at the shops and
carriages,—

“Oh, there’s Harrison’s, where I bought so many of my wedding things.
Dear! how altered! They’ve got immense plate-glass windows, larger than
Crawford’s in Southampton. Oh, and there, I declare—no, it is not—yes,
it is—Margaret, we have just passed Mr. Henry Lennox. Where can he be
going, among all these shops?”

Margaret started forwards, and as quickly fell back, half-smiling at
herself for the sudden motion. They were a hundred yards away by this
time; but he seemed like a relic of Helstone—he was associated with a
bright morning, an eventful day, and she should have liked to have seen
him, without his seeing her,—without the chance of their speaking.

The evening, without employment, passed in a room high up in an hotel,
was long and heavy. Mr. Hale went out to his bookseller’s, and to call
on a friend or two. Every one they saw, either in the house or out in
the streets, appeared hurrying to some appointment, expected by, or
expecting somebody. They alone seemed strange and friendless, and
desolate. Yet within a mile, Margaret knew of house after house, where
she for her own sake, and her mother for her aunt Shaw’s, would be
welcomed, if they came in gladness, or even in peace of mind. If they
came sorrowing, and wanting sympathy in a complicated trouble like the
present, then they would be felt as a shadow in all these houses of
intimate acquaintances, not friends. London life is too whirling and
full to admit of even an hour of that deep silence of feeling which the
friends of Job showed, when “they sat with him on the ground seven days
and seven nights, and none spake a word unto him; for they saw that his
grief was very great.”




CHAPTER VII.

NEW SCENES AND FACES.

        “Mist clogs the sunshine,
        Smoky dwarf houses
        Hem me round everywhere.”
                     MATTHEW ARNOLD.


The next afternoon, about twenty miles from Milton-Northern, they
entered on the little branch railway that led to Heston. Heston itself
was one long straggling street, running parallel to the seashore. It
had a character of its own, as different from the little bathing-places
in the south of England as they again from those of the continent. To
use a Scotch word, everything looked more “purpose-like.” The country
carts had more iron, and less wood and leather about the horse-gear; the
people in the streets, although on pleasure bent, had yet a busy mind.
The colours looked grayer—more enduring, not so gay and pretty. There
were no smock-frocks, even among the country-folk; they retarded motion,
and were apt to catch on machinery, and so the habit of wearing them had
died out. In such towns in the south of England, Margaret had seen the
shopmen, when not employed in their business, lounging a little at their
doors, enjoying the fresh air, and the look up and down the street.
Here, if they had any leisure from customers, they made themselves
business in the shop—even, Margaret fancied, to the unnecessary
unrolling and re-rolling of ribbons. All these differences struck upon
her mind, as she and her mother went out next morning to look for
lodgings.

Their two nights at hotels had cost more than Mr. Hale had anticipated,
and they were glad to take the first clean, cheerful rooms they met with
that were at liberty to receive them. There, for the first time for many
days, did Margaret feel at rest. There was a dreaminess in the rest,
too, which made it still more perfect and luxurious to repose in. The
distant sea, lapped the sandy shore with measured sound; the nearer
cries of the donkey-boys; the unusual scenes moving before her like
pictures, which she cared not in her laziness to have fully explained
before they passed away; the stroll down to the beach to breathe the
sea-air, soft and warm on that sandy shore even to the end of November;
the great long misty sea-line touching the tender-coloured sky; the
white sail of a distant boat turning silver in some pale sunbeam:—it
seemed as if she could dream her life away in such luxury of
pensiveness, in which she made her present all in all, from not daring
to think of the past, or wishing to contemplate the future.

But the future must be met, however stern and iron it be. One evening it
was arranged that Margaret and her father should go the next day to
Milton-Northern, and look out for a house. Mr. Hale had received several
letters from Mr. Bell, and one or two from Mr. Thornton, and he was
anxious to ascertain at once a good many particulars respecting his
position and chances of success there, which he could only do by an
interview with the latter gentleman. Margaret knew that they ought to be
removing; but she had a repugnance to the idea of a manufacturing town,
and believed that her mother was receiving benefit from Heston air, so
she would willingly have deferred the expedition to Milton.

For several miles before they reached Milton, they saw a deep
lead-coloured cloud hanging over the horizon in the direction in which
it lay. It was all the darker from contrast with the pale gray-blue of
the wintry sky; for in Heston there had been the earliest signs of
frost. Nearer to the town, the air had a faint taste and smell of smoke;
perhaps, after all, more a loss of the fragrance of grass and herbage
than any positive taste or smell. Quick they were whirled over long,
straight, hopeless streets of regularly-built houses, all small and of
brick. Here and there a great oblong many-windowed factory stood up,
like a hen among her chickens, puffing out black “unparliamentary”
smoke, and sufficiently accounting for the cloud which Margaret had
taken to foretell rain. As they drove through the larger and wider
streets, from the station to the hotel, they had to stop constantly;
great loaded lurries blocked up the not over-wide thoroughfares.
Margaret had now and then been into the city in her drives with her
aunt. But there the heavy lumbering vehicles seemed various in their
purposes and intent; here every van, every waggon and truck, bore
cotton, either in the raw shape in bags, or the woven shape in bales of
calico. People thronged the footpaths, most of them well-dressed as
regarded the material, but with a slovenly looseness which struck
Margaret as different from the shabby, threadbare smartness of a similar
class in London.

“New Street,” said Mr. Hale. “This, I believe, is the principal street
in Milton. Bell has often spoken to me about it. It was the opening of
this street from a lane into a great thoroughfare, thirty years ago,
which has caused his property to rise so much in value. Mr. Thornton’s
mill must be somewhere not very far off, for he is Mr. Bell’s tenant.
But I fancy he dates from his warehouse.”

“Where is our hotel, papa?”

“Close to the end of this street, I believe. Shall we have lunch before
or after we have looked at the houses we marked in the Milton Times?”

“Oh, let us get our work done first.”

“Very well. Then I will only see if there is any note or letter for me
from Mr. Thornton, who said he would let me know anything he might hear
about these houses, and then we will set off. We will keep the cab; it
will be safer than losing ourselves, and being too late for the train
this afternoon.”

There were no letters awaiting him. They set out on their house-hunting.
Thirty pounds a-year was all they could afford to give, but in Hampshire
they could have met with a roomy house and pleasant garden for the
money. Here, even the necessary accommodation of two sitting-rooms and
four bed-rooms seemed unattainable. They went through their list,
rejecting each as they visited it. They then looked at each other in
dismay.

“We must go back to the second, I think. That one,—in Crampton, don’t
they call the suburb? There were three sitting-rooms; don’t you remember
how we laughed at the number compared with the three bed-rooms? But I
have planned it all. The front room down-stairs is to be your study and
our dining-room (poor papa!), for you know, we settled mamma is to have
as cheerful a sitting-room as we can get; and that front room up-stairs,
with the atrocious blue and pink paper and heavy cornice, had really a
pretty view over the plain, with a great bend of river, or canal, or
whatever it is, down below. Then I could have the little bed-room
behind, in that projection at the head of the first flight of stairs
over the kitchen, you know—and you and mamma the room behind the
drawing-room, and that closet in the roof will make you a splendid
dressing-room.”

“But Dixon, and the girl we are to have to help?”

“Oh, wait a minute. I am overpowered by the discovery of my own genius
for management. Dixon is to have—let me see, I had it once—the back
sitting-room. I think she will like that. She grumbles so much about the
stairs at Heston; and the girl is to have that sloping attic over your
room and mamma’s. Won’t that do?”

“I dare say it will. But the papers. What taste! And the over-loading
such a house with colour and such heavy cornices!”

“Never mind, papa! Surely you can charm the landlord into re-papering
one or two of the rooms—the drawing-room and your bed-room—for mamma
will come most in contact with them; and your book-shelves will hide a
great deal of that gaudy pattern in the dining-room.”

“Then you think it the best? If so, I had better go at once and call on
this Mr. Donkin, to whom the advertisement refers me. I will take you
back to the hotel, where you can order lunch, and rest, and by the time
it is ready, I shall be with you. I hope I shall be able to get new
papers.”

Margaret hoped so too, though she said nothing. She had never come
fairly in contact with the taste that loves ornament, however bad, more
than the plainness and simplicity which are of themselves the framework
of elegance.

Her father took her through the entrance of the hotel, and leaving her
at the foot of the staircase, went to the address of the landlord of the
house they had fixed upon. Just as Margaret had her hand on the door of
their sitting-room, she was followed by a quick-stepping waiter:

“I beg your pardon, ma’am. The gentleman was gone so quickly, I had no
time to tell him. Mr. Thornton called almost directly after you left;
and as I understood, from what the gentleman said, you would be back in
an hour, I told him so, and he came again about five minutes ago, and
said he would wait for Mr. Hale. He is in your room now, ma’am.”

“Thank you. My father will return soon, and then you can tell him.”

Margaret opened the door and went in with the straight, fearless,
dignified presence habitual to her. She felt no awkwardness; she had too
much the habits of society for that. Here was a person come on business
to her father; and, as he was one who had shown himself obliging, she
was disposed to treat him with a full measure of civility. Mr. Thornton
was a good deal more surprised and discomfited than she. Instead of a
quiet, middle-aged clergyman, a young lady came forward with frank
dignity,—a young lady of a different type to most of those he was in
the habit of seeing. Her dress was very plain: a close straw bonnet of
the best material and shape, trimmed with white ribbon; a large Indian
shawl, which hung about her in long heavy folds, and which she wore as
an empress wears her drapery. He did not understand who she was, as he
caught the simple, straight, unabashed look, which showed that his
being there was of no concern to the beautiful countenance, and called
up no flush of surprise to the pale ivory of the complexion. He had
heard that Mr. Hale had a daughter, but he had imagined that she was a
little girl.

“Mr. Thornton, I believe!” said Margaret, after a half-instant’s pause,
during which his unready words would not come. “Will you sit down. My
father brought me to the door not a minute ago, but unfortunately he was
not told that you were here, and he has gone away on some business. But
he will come back almost directly. I am sorry you have had the trouble
of calling twice.”

Mr. Thornton was in habits of authority himself, but she seemed to
assume some kind of rule over him at once. He had been getting impatient
at the loss of his time on a market-day, the moment before she appeared,
yet now he calmly took a seat at her bidding.

“Do you know where it is that Mr. Hale has gone to? Perhaps I might be
able to find him.”

“He has gone to a Mr. Donkin in Canute Street. He is the landlord of the
house my father wishes to take in Crampton.”

Mr. Thornton knew the house. He had seen the advertisement, and been to
look at it, in compliance with a request of Mr. Bell’s that he would
assist Mr. Hale to the best of his power: and also instigated by his own
interest in the case of a clergyman who had given up his living under
circumstances such as those of Mr. Hale. Mr. Thornton had thought that
the house in Crampton was really just the thing; but now that he saw
Margaret, with her superb ways of moving and looking, he began to feel
ashamed of having imagined that it would do very well for the Hales, in
spite of a certain vulgarity in it which had struck him at the time of
his looking it over.

Margaret could not help her looks; but the short curled upper lip, the
round, massive up-turned chin, the manner of carrying her head, her
movements, full of a soft feminine defiance, always gave strangers the
impression of haughtiness. She was tired now, and would much rather have
remained silent, and taken the rest her father had planned for her; but,
of course, she owed to herself to be a gentlewoman, and to speak
courteously from time to time to this stranger; not over-brushed, nor
over-polished, it must be confessed, after his rough encounter with
Milton streets and crowds. She wished that he would go, as he had once
spoken of doing, instead of sitting there, answering with curt sentences
all the remarks she made. She had taken off her shawl, and hung it over
the back of her chair. She sat facing him and facing the light; her full
beauty met his eye; her round white flexile throat rising out of the
full, yet lithe figure; her lips moving so slightly as she spoke, not
breaking the cold serene look of her face with any variation from the
one lovely haughty curve; her eyes, with their soft gloom, meeting his
with quiet maiden freedom. He almost said to himself that he did not
like her, before their conversation ended; he tried so to compensate
himself for the mortified feeling, that while he looked upon her with
an admiration he could not repress, she looked at him with proud
indifference, taking him, he thought, for what, in his irritation, he
told himself he was—a great rough fellow, with not a grace or a
refinement about him. Her quiet coldness of demeanour he interpreted
into contemptuousness, and resented it in his heart to the pitch of
almost inclining him to get up and go away, and have nothing more to do
with these Hales, and their superciliousness.

Just as Margaret had exhausted her last subject of conversation—and yet
conversation that could hardly be called which consisted of so few and
such short speeches—her father came in, and with his pleasant
gentlemanly courteousness of apology, reinstated his name and family in
Mr. Thornton’s good opinion.

Mr. Hale and his visitor had a good deal to say respecting their mutual
friend, Mr. Bell; and Margaret, glad that her part of entertaining the
visitor was over, went to the window to try and make herself more
familiar with the strange aspect of the street. She got so much absorbed
in watching what was going on outside that she hardly heard her father
when he spoke to her, and he had to repeat what he said:

“Margaret! the landlord will persist in admiring that hideous paper, and
I am afraid we must let it remain.”

“Oh dear! I am sorry!” she replied, and began to turn over in her mind
the possibility of hiding part of it, at least, by some of her sketches,
but gave up the idea at last, as likely only to make bad worse. Her
father, meanwhile, with his kindly country hospitality, was pressing Mr.
Thornton to stay to luncheon with them. It would have been very
inconvenient to him to do so, yet he felt that he should have yielded,
if Margaret by word or look had seconded her father’s invitation; he was
glad she did not, and yet he was irritated at her for not doing so. She
gave him a low, grave bow when he left, and he felt more awkward and
self-conscious in every limb than he had ever done in his life before.

“Well, Margaret, now to luncheon as fast as we can. Have you ordered
it?”

“No, papa; that man was here when I came home, and I have never had an
opportunity.”

“Then we must take anything we can get. He must have been waiting a long
time I’m afraid.”

“It seemed exceedingly long to me. I was just at the last gasp when you
came in. He never went on with any subject, but gave little, short,
abrupt answers.”

“Very much to the point though, I should think. He is a clear-headed
fellow. He said (did you hear?) that Crampton is on gravelly soil, and
by far the most healthy suburb in the neighbourhood of Milton.”

When they returned to Heston, there was the day’s account to be given to
Mrs. Hale, who was full of questions, which they answered in the
intervals of tea-drinking.

“And what is your correspondent, Mr. Thornton, like?”

“Ask Margaret,” said her husband. “She and he had a long attempt at
conversation, while I was away speaking to the landlord.”

“Oh! I hardly know what he is like,” said Margaret, lazily; too tired to
tax her powers of description much. And then rousing herself, she said,
“He is a tall, broad-shouldered man, about—how old, papa?”

“I should guess about thirty.”

“About thirty—with a face that is neither exactly plain, nor yet
handsome, nothing remarkable—not quite a gentleman; but that was hardly
to be expected.”

“Not vulgar or common though,” put in her father, rather jealous of any
disparagement of the sole friend he had in Milton.

“Oh, no!” said Margaret. “With such an expression of resolution and
power, no face, however plain in feature, could be either vulgar or
common. I should not like to have to bargain with him; he looks very
inflexible. Altogether a man who seems made for his niche, mamma;
sagacious, and strong, as becomes a great tradesman.”

“Don’t call the Milton manufacturers tradesmen, Margaret,” said her
father. “They are very different.”

“Are they? I apply the word to all who have something tangible to sell;
but if you think the term is not correct, papa, I won’t use it. But, oh
mamma! speaking of vulgarity and commonness, you must prepare yourself
for our drawing-room paper. Pink and blue roses, with yellow leaves! And
such a heavy cornice round the room!”

But when they removed to their new house in Milton, the obnoxious papers
were gone. The landlord received their thanks very composedly; and let
them think, if they liked, that he had relented from his expressed
determination not to repaper. There was no particular need to tell them,
that what he did not care to do for a Reverend Mr. Hale, unknown in
Milton, he was only too glad to do at the one short sharp remonstrance
of Mr. Thornton, the wealthy manufacturer.




CHAPTER VIII.

HOME SICKNESS.

    “And it’s hame, hame, hame,
    Hame fain wad I be.”


It needed the pretty light papering of the rooms to reconcile them to
Milton. It needed more—more that could not be had. The thick yellow
November fogs had come on; and the view of the plain in the valley, made
by the sweeping bend of the river, was all shut out when Mrs. Hale
arrived at her new home.

Margaret and Dixon had been at work two days, unpacking and arranging,
but everything inside the house still looked in disorder; and outside a
thick fog crept up to the very windows, and was driven in to every open
door in choking white wreaths of unwholsome mist.

“Oh, Margaret! are we to live here?” asked Mrs. Hale in blank dismay.

Margaret’s heart echoed the dreariness of the tone in which this
question was put. She could scarcely command herself enough to say, “Oh,
the fogs in London are sometimes far worse!”

“But then you knew that London itself, and friends lay behind it.
Here—well! we are desolate. Oh Dixon, what a place this is!”

“Indeed, ma’am, I’m sure it will be your death before long, and then I
know who’ll—stay! Miss Hale, that’s far too heavy for you to lift.”

“Not at all, thank you, Dixon,” replied Margaret coldly. “The best thing
we can do for mamma is to get her room quite ready for her to go to bed,
while I go and bring her a cup of coffee.”

Mr. Hale was equally out of spirits, and equally came upon Margaret for
sympathy.

“Margaret, I do believe this is an unhealthy place. Only suppose that
your mother’s health or yours should suffer. I wish I had gone into some
country place in Wales; this is really terrible,” said he, going up to
the window.

There was no comfort to be given. They were settled in Milton, and must
endure smoke and fogs for a season; indeed, all other life seemed shut
out from them by as thick a fog of circumstance. Only the day before,
Mr. Hale had been reckoning up with dismay how much their removal and
fortnight at Heston had cost, and he found it had absorbed nearly all
his little stock of ready money. No! here they were, and here they must
remain.

At night when Margaret realised this, she felt inclined to sit down in a
stupor of despair. The heavy smoky air hung about her bedroom, which
occupied the long narrow projection at the back of the house. The
window, placed at the side of the oblong, looked at the blank wall of a
similar projection, not above ten feet distant. It loomed through the
fog like a great barrier to hope. Inside the room everything was in
confusion. All their efforts had been directed to make her mother’s room
comfortable. Margaret sat down on a box, the direction card upon which
struck her as having been written at Helstone—beautiful, beloved
Helstone! She lost herself in dismal thought: but at last she determined
to take her mind away from the present; and suddenly remembered that she
had a letter from Edith which she had only half read in the bustle of
the morning. It was to tell of their arrival at Corfu; their voyage
along the Mediterranean—their music, and dancing on board ship; the gay
new life opening upon her; her house with its trellised balcony, and its
views over white cliffs and deep blue sea.

Edith wrote fluently and well, if not graphically. She could not only
seize the salient and characteristic points of a scene, but she could
enumerate enough of indiscriminate particular for Margaret to make it
out for herself. Captain Lennox and another lately married officer
shared a villa, high up on the beautiful precipitous rocks overhanging
the sea. Their days, late as it was in the year, seemed spent in boating
or land-picnics; all out-of-doors, pleasure-seeking and glad, Edith’s
life seemed like the deep vault of blue sky above her, free—utterly
free from fleck or cloud. Her husband had to attend drill, and she, the
most musical officer’s wife there, had to copy the new and popular tunes
out of the most recent English music, for the benefit of the bandmaster;
those seemed their most severe and arduous duties. She expressed an
affectionate hope that, if the regiment stopped another year at Corfu,
Margaret might come out and pay her a long visit. She asked Margaret if
she remembered the day twelve-month on which she, Edith, wrote—how it
rained all day long in Harley Street; and how she would not put on her
new gown to go to a stupid dinner, and get it all wet and splashed in
going to the carriage; and how at that very dinner they had first met
Captain Lennox.

Yes! Margaret remembered it well. Edith and Mrs. Shaw had gone to
dinner. Margaret had joined the party in the evening. The recollection
of the plentiful luxury of all arrangements, the stately handsomeness of
the furniture, the size of the house, the peaceful, untroubled ease of
the visitors—all came vividly before her, in strange contrast to the
present time. The smooth sea of that old life closed up, without a mark
left to tell where they had all been. The habitual dinners, the calls,
the dancing evenings, were all going on, going on for ever, though her
Aunt Shaw and Edith were no longer there; and she, of course, was even
less missed. She doubted if any one of that old set ever thought of her,
except Henry Lennox. He too, she knew, would strive to forget her,
because of the pain she had caused him. She had heard him often boast of
his power of putting any disagreeable thought far away from him. Then
she penetrated farther into what might have been. If she had cared for
him as a lover, and had accepted him, and this change in her father’s
opinions and consequent station had taken place, she could not doubt but
that it would have been impatiently received by Mr. Lennox. It was a
bitter mortification to her in one sense; but she could bear it
patiently, because she knew her father’s purity of purpose, and that
strengthened her to endure his errors, grave and serious though in her
estimation they were. But the fact of the world esteeming her father
degraded, in its rough wholesale judgment, would have oppressed and
irritated Mr. Lennox. As she realised what might have been, she grew to
be thankful for what was. They were at the lowest now; they could not be
worse. Edith’s astonishment and her Aunt Shaw’s dismay would have to be
met bravely, when their letters came. So Margaret rose up and began
slowly to undress herself, feeling the full luxury of acting leisurely,
late as it was, after all the past hurry of the day. She fell asleep,
hoping for some brightness, either internal or external. But if she had
known how long it would be before the brightness came, her heart would
have sunk low down. The time of the year was most unpropitious to health
as well as to spirits. Her mother caught a severe cold, and Dixon
herself was evidently not well, although Margaret could not insult her
more than by trying to save her, or by taking any care of her. They
could hear of no girl to assist her; all were at work in the factories;
at least, those who applied were well scolded by Dixon, for thinking
that such as they could ever be trusted to work in a gentleman’s house.
So they had to keep a charwoman in almost constant employ. Margaret
longed to send for Charlotte; but besides the objection of her being a
better servant than they now could afford to keep, the distance was too
great.

Mr. Hale met with several pupils, recommended to him by Mr. Bell, or by
the more immediate influence of Mr. Thornton. They were mostly of the
age when many boys would be still at school, but, according to the
prevalent, and, apparently well-founded notions of Milton, to make a lad
into a good tradesman he must be caught young, and acclimated to the
life of the mill, or office, or warehouse. If he were sent to even the
Scotch Universities, he came back unsettled for commercial pursuits: how
much more so if he went to Oxford or Cambridge, where he could not be
entered till he was eighteen? So most of the manufacturers placed their
sons in situations at from fourteen or fifteen years of age, unsparingly
cutting away all off-shoots in the direction of literature or high
mental cultivation, in hopes of throwing the whole strength and vigour
of the plant into commerce. Still there were some wiser parents; and
some who had sense enough to perceive their own deficiencies, and strive
to remedy them. Nay, there were a few no longer youths, but men in the
prime of life, who had the stern wisdom to acknowledge their own
ignorance, and to learn late what they should have learnt early. Mr.
Thornton was perhaps the oldest of Mr. Hale’s pupils. He was certainly
the favourite. Mr. Hale got into the habit of quoting his opinions so
frequently, and with such regard, that it became a little domestic joke
to wonder what time, during the hour appointed for instruction, could be
given to absolute learning, so much of it appeared to have been spent in
conversation.

Margaret rather encouraged this light, merry way of viewing her father’s
acquaintance with Mr. Thornton, because she felt that her mother was
inclined to look upon this new friendship of her husband’s with jealous
eyes. As long as his time had been solely occupied with his books and
his parishioners, as at Helstone, she had appeared to care little
whether she saw much of him or not; but now that he looked eagerly
forward to each renewal of his intercourse with Mr. Thornton, she seemed
hurt and annoyed, as if he were slighting her companionship for the
first time. Mr. Hale’s over-praise had the usual effect of over-praise
upon his auditors; they were a little inclined to rebel against
Aristides being always called the Just.

After a quiet life in a country parsonage for more than twenty years,
there was something dazzling to Mr. Hale in the energy which conquered
immense difficulties with ease; the power of the machinery of Milton,
the power of the men of Milton, impressed him with a sense of grandeur,
which he yielded to without caring to inquire into the details of its
exercise. But Margaret went less abroad, among machinery and men; saw
less of power in its public effect, and, as it happened, she was thrown
with one or two of those who, in all measures affecting masses of
people, must be acute sufferers for the good of many. The question
always is, has everything been done to make the sufferings of these
exceptions as small as possible? or, in the triumph of the crowded
procession, have the helpless been trampled on, instead of being gently
lifted aside out of the roadway of the conqueror, whom they have no
power to accompany on his march?

It fell to Margaret’s share to have to look out for a servant to assist
Dixon, who had at first undertaken to find just the person she wanted to
do all the rough work of the house. But Dixon’s ideas of helpful girls
were founded on the recollection of tidy elder scholars at Helstone
school, who were only too proud to be allowed to come to the parsonage
on a busy day, and treated Mrs. Dixon with all the respect, and a good
deal more of fright, which they paid to Mr. and Mrs. Hale. Dixon was not
unconscious of this awed reverence which was given to her; nor did she
dislike it: it flattered her much as Louis the Fourteenth was flattered
by his courtiers shading their eyes from the dazzling light of his
presence. But nothing short of her faithful love for Mrs. Hale could
have made her endure the rough independent way in which all the Milton
girls, who made application for the servant’s place, replied to her
inquiries respecting their qualifications. They even went the length of
questioning her back again; having doubts and fears of their own, as to
the solvency of a family who lived in a house of thirty pounds a-year,
and yet gave themselves airs, and kept two servants, one of them so very
high and mighty. Mr. Hale was no longer looked upon as Vicar of
Helstone, but as a man who only spent at a certain rate. Margaret was
weary and impatient of the accounts which Dixon perpetually brought to
Mrs. Hale of the behaviour of these would-be servants. Not but what
Margaret was repelled by the rough uncourteous manners of these people;
not but what she shrunk with fastidious pride from their hail-fellow
accost, and severely resented their unconcealed curiosity as to the
means and position of any family who lived in Milton, and yet were not
engaged in trade of some kind. But the more Margaret felt impertinence,
the more likely she was to be silent on the subject; and, at any rate,
if she took upon herself to make inquiry for a servant, she could spare
her mother the recital of all her disappointments and fancied or real
insults.

Margaret accordingly went up and down to butchers and grocers, seeking
for a nonpareil of a girl; and lowering her hopes and expectations every
week, as she found the difficulty of meeting with any one in a
manufacturing town who did not prefer the better wages and greater
independence of working in a mill. It was something of a trial to
Margaret to go out by herself in this busy bustling place. Mrs. Shaw’s
ideas of propriety and her own helpless dependence on others, had always
made her insist that a footman should accompany Edith and Margaret, if
they went beyond Harley Street or the immediate neighbourhood. The
limits by which this rule of her aunt’s had circumscribed Margaret’s
independence had been silently rebelled against at the time: and she had
doubly enjoyed the free walks and rambles of her forest life from the
contrast which they presented. She went along there with a boundless
fearless step, that occasionally broke out into a run, if she were in a
hurry, and occasionally was stilled into perfect repose, as she stood
listening to, or watching any of the wild creatures who sang in the
leafy courts, or glanced out with their keen bright eyes from the low
brushwood or tangled furze. It was a trial to come down from such motion
or such stillness, only guided by her own sweet will, to the even and
decorous pace necessary in streets. But she could have laughed at
herself for minding this change, if it had not been accompanied by what
was a more serious annoyance.

The side of the town on which Crampton lay was especially a thoroughfare
for the factory people. In the back streets around them there were many
mills, out of which poured streams of men and women two or three times a
day. Until Margaret had learnt the times of their ingress and egress,
she was very unfortunate in constantly falling in with them. They came
rushing along, with bold, fearless faces, and loud laughs and jests,
particularly aimed at all those who appeared to be above them in rank or
station. The tones of their unrestrained voices, and their carelessness
of all common rules of street politeness, frightened Margaret a little
at first. The girls, with their rough, but not unfriendly freedom, would
comment on her dress, even touch her shawl or gown to ascertain the
exact material; nay, once or twice she was asked questions relative to
some article which they particularly admired. There was such a simple
reliance on her womanly sympathy with their love of dress, and on her
kindliness, that she gladly replied to these inquiries, as soon as she
understood them; and half smiled back at their remarks. She did not mind
meeting any number of girls, loud spoken and boisterous though they
might be. But she alternately dreaded and fired up against the workmen,
who commented not on her dress, but on her looks, in the same open,
fearless manner. She, who had hitherto felt that even the most refined
remark on her personal appearance was an impertinence, had to endure
undisguised admiration from these outspoken men. But the very
outspokenness marked their innocence of any intention to hurt her
delicacy, as she would have perceived if she had been less frightened by
the disorderly tumult. Out of her fright came a flash of indignation
which made her face scarlet, and her dark eyes gather flame, as she
heard some of their speeches. Yet there were other sayings of theirs,
which, when she reached the quiet safety of home, amused her even while
they irritated her.

For instance, one day, after she had passed a number of men, several of
whom had paid her the not unusual compliment of wishing she was their
sweetheart, one of the lingerers added, “Your bonny face, my lass, makes
the day look brighter.” And another day, as she was unconsciously
smiling at some passing thought, she was addressed by a poorly-dressed,
middle-aged workman, with, “You may well smile, my lass; many a one
would smile to have such a bonny face.” This man looked so careworn that
Margaret could not help giving him an answering smile, glad to think
that her looks, such as they were, should have had the power to call up
a pleasant thought. He seemed to understand her acknowledging glance,
and a silent recognition was established between them whenever the
chances of the day brought them across each other’s paths. They had
never exchanged a word; nothing had been said but that first compliment;
yet somehow Margaret looked upon this man with more interest than upon
any one else in Milton. Once or twice, on Sundays, she saw him walking
with a girl, evidently his daughter, and, if possible, still more
unhealthy than he was himself.

One day Margaret and her father had been as far as the fields that lay
around the town; it was early spring, and she had gathered some of the
hedge and ditch flowers, dog-violets, lesser celandines, and the like,
with an unspoken lament in her heart for the sweet profusion of the
South. Her father had left her to go into Milton upon some business; and
on the road home she met her humble friends. The girl looked wistfully
at the flowers, and, acting on a sudden impulse, Margaret offered them
to her. Her pale blue eyes lightened up as she took them, and her father
spoke for her.

“Thank yo, Miss. Bessy’ll think a deal o’ them flowers; that hoo will;
and I shall think a deal o’ yor kindness. Yo’re not of this country, I
reckon?”

“No!” said Margaret, half sighing. “I come from the South—from
Hampshire,” she continued, a little afraid of wounding his consciousness
of ignorance, if she used a name which he did not understand.

“That’s beyond London, I reckon? And I come fro’ Burnleyways, and forty
miles to th’ North. And yet, yo see, North and South has both met and
made kind o’ friends in this big smoky place.”

Margaret had slackened her pace to a walk alongside of the man and his
daughter, whose steps were regulated by the feebleness of the latter.
She now spoke to the girl, and there was a sound of tender pity in the
tone of her voice as she did so that went right to the heart of the
father.

“I’m afraid you are not very strong.”

“No,” said the girl, “nor never will be.”

“Spring is coming,” said Margaret, as if to suggest pleasant, hopeful
thoughts.

“Spring nor summer will do me good,” said the girl quietly.

Margaret looked up at the man, almost expecting some contradiction from
him, or at least some remark that would modify his daughter’s utter
hopelessness. But instead, he added—

“I’m afeared hoo speaks the truth. I’m afeared hoo’s too far gone in a
waste.”

“I shall have a spring where I am boun’ to, and flowers, and amaranths,
and shining robes besides.”

“Poor lass, poor lass!” said her father in a low tone. “I’m none so sure
o’ that; but it’s a comfort to thee, poor lass, poor lass. Poor father!
it’ll be soon.”

Margaret was shocked by his words—shocked but not repelled; rather
attracted and interested.

“Where do you live? I think we must be neighbours, we meet so often on
this road.”

“We put up at nine Frances Street, second turn to th’ left at after
yo’ve past th’ Goulden Dragon.”

“And your name? I must not forget that.”

“I’m none ashamed o’ my name. It’s Nicholas Higgins. Hoo’s called Bessy
Higgins. Whatten yo’ asking for?”

Margaret was surprised at this last question, for at Helstone it would
have been an understood thing, after the enquiries she had made, that
she intended to come and call upon any poor neighbour whose name and
habitation she had asked for.

“I thought—I meant to come and see you.” She suddenly felt rather shy
of offering the visit, without having any reason to give for her wish to
make it, beyond a kindly interest in a stranger. It seemed all at once
to take the shape of an impertinence on her part; she read this meaning
too in the man’s eyes.

“I’m none so fond of having strange folk in my house.” But then
relenting, as he saw her heightened colour, he added, “Yo’re a foreigner,
as one may say, and maybe don’t know many folk here, and yo’ve given my
wench here flowers out of yo’r own hand;—yo may come if yo like.”

Margaret was half amused, half-nettled at this answer. She was not sure
if she would go where permission was given so like a favour conferred.
But when they came to the turn into Frances Street, the girl stopped a
minute, and said,

“Yo’ll not forget yo’re to come and see us.”

“Aye, aye,” said the father, impatiently, “hoo’ll come. Hoo’s a bit set
up now, because hoo thinks I might ha’ spoken more civilly; but hoo’ll
think better on it, and come. I can read her proud bonny face like a
book. Come along, Bess; there’s the mill bell ringing.”

Margaret went home, wondering at her new friends, and smiling at the
man’s insight into what had been passing in her mind. From that day
Milton became a brighter place to her. It was not the long, bleak sunny
days of spring, nor yet was it that time was reconciling her to the town
of her habitation. It was that in it she had found a human interest.




CHAPTER IX.

DRESSING FOR TEA.

    “Let China’s earth, enriched with coloured stains,
    Pencil’d with gold, and streaked with azure veins,
    The grateful flavour of the Indian leaf,
    Or Mocha’s sunburnt berry glad receive.”
              MRS. BARBOULD.


The day after this meeting with Higgins and his daughter Mr. Hale came
upstairs into the little drawing-room at an unusual hour. He went up to
different objects in the room, as if examining them, but Margaret saw
that it was merely a nervous trick—a way of putting off something he
wished, yet feared to say. Out it came at last—

“My dear! I’ve asked Mr. Thornton to come to tea to-night.”

Mrs. Hale was leaning back in her easy chair, with her eyes shut, and an
expression of pain on her face which had become habitual to her of late.
But she roused up into querulousness at this speech of her husband’s.

“Mr. Thornton!—and to-night! What in the world does the man want to
come here for? And Dixon is washing my muslins and laces, and there is
no soft water with these horrid east winds, which I suppose we shall
have all the year round in Milton.”

“The wind is veering round, my dear,” said Mr. Hale, looking out at the
smoke, which drifted right from the east, only he did not yet understand
the points of the compass, and rather arranged them ad libitum according
to circumstances.

“Don’t tell me!” said Mrs. Hale, shuddering up, and wrapping her shawl
about her still more closely. “But, east or west wind, I suppose this
man comes.”

“Oh mamma, that shows you never saw Mr. Thornton. He looks like a person
who would enjoy battling with every adverse thing he could meet
with—enemies, winds, or circumstances. The more it rains and blows, the
more certain we are to have him. But I’ll go and help Dixon. I’m getting
to be a famous clear-starcher. And he won’t want any amusement beyond
talking to Papa. Papa, I am really longing to see the Pythias to your
Damon. You know I never saw him but once, and then we were so puzzled to
know what to say to each other that we did not get on particularly
well.”

“I don’t know that you would ever like him, or think him agreeable,
Margaret. He is not a lady’s man.”

Margaret wreathed her throat in a scornful curve.

“I don’t particularly admire ladies’ men, papa. But Mr. Thornton comes
here as your friend—as one who has appreciated you”—

“The only person in Milton,” said Mrs. Hale.

“So we will give him a welcome, and some cocoa-nut cakes. Dixon will be
flattered if we ask her to make some; and I will undertake to iron your
caps, mamma.”

Many a time that morning did Margaret wish Mr. Thornton far enough away.
She had planned other employments for herself: a letter to Edith, a good
piece of Dante, a visit to the Higginses. But, instead, she ironed away,
listening to Dixon’s complaints, and only hoping that by an excess of
sympathy she might prevent her from carrying the recital of her sorrows
to Mrs. Hale. Every now and then, Margaret had to remind herself of her
father’s regard for Mr. Thornton, to subdue the irritation of weariness
that was stealing over her, and bringing on one of the bad headaches to
which she had lately become liable. She could hardly speak when she sat
down at last, and told her mother that she was no longer Peggy the
laundry-maid, but Margaret Hale the lady. She meant this speech for a
little joke, and was vexed enough with her busy tongue when she found
her mother taking it seriously.

“Yes! if any one had told me, when I was Miss Beresford, and one of the
belles of the country, that a child of mine would have to stand half a
day, in a little poky kitchen, working away like any servant, that we
might prepare properly for the reception of a tradesman, and that this
tradesman should be the only”—

“Oh, mamma!” said Margaret, lifting herself up, “don’t punish me for so
careless a speech. I don’t mind ironing, or any kind of work for you and
papa. I am myself a born and bred lady through it all, even though it
comes to scouring a floor, or washing dishes. I am tired now, just for a
little while; but in half an hour I shall be ready to do the same over
again. And as to Mr. Thornton’s being in trade, why he can’t help that
now, poor fellow. I don’t suppose his education would fit him for much
else.” Margaret lifted herself slowly up, and went to her own room; for
just now she could not bear much more.

In Mr. Thornton’s house, at this very same time, a similar, yet
different scene was going on. A large-boned lady, long past middle age,
sat at work in a grim handsomely-furnished dining-room. Her features,
like her frame, were strong and massive, rather than heavy. Her face
moved slowly from one decided expression to another equally decided.
There was no great variety in her countenance; but those who looked at
it once, generally looked at it again; even the passers by in the
street, half-turned their heads to gaze an instant longer at the firm,
severe, dignified woman, who never gave way in street-courtesy, or
paused in her straight-onward course to the clearly defined end which
she proposed to herself.

She was handsomely dressed in stout black silk, of which not a thread
was worn or discoloured. She was mending a large, long table-cloth of
the finest texture, holding it up against the light occasionally to
discover thin places, which required her delicate care. There was not a
book about in the room, with the exception of Matthew Henry’s Bible
commentaries, six volumes of which lay in the centre of the massive
side-board, flanked by a tea-urn on one side, and a lamp on the other.
In some remote apartment, there was exercise upon the piano going on.
Someone was practising up a morceau de salon, playing it very rapidly,
every third note, on an average, being either indistinct, or wholly
missed out, and the loud chords at the end being half of them false, but
not the less satisfactory to the performer. Mrs. Thornton heard a step,
like her own in its decisive character, pass the dining-room door.

“John! Is that you?”

Her son opened the door, and showed himself.

“What has brought you home so early? I thought you were going to tea
with that friend of Mr. Bell’s; that Mr. Hale?”

“So I am, mother. I am come home to dress!”

“Dress! humph! When I was a girl, young men were satisfied with dressing
once in a day. Why should you dress to go and take a cup of tea with an
old parson?”

“Mr. Hale is a gentleman, and his wife and daughter are ladies.”

“Wife and daughter! Do they teach too? What do they do? You have never
mentioned them.”

“No! mother, because I have never seen Mrs. Hale; I have only seen Miss
Hale for half an hour.”

“Take care you don’t get caught by a penniless girl, John.”

“I am not easily caught, mother, as I think you know. But I must not
have Miss Hale spoken of in that way, which, you know, is offensive to
me. I never was aware of any young lady trying to catch me yet, nor do I
believe that any one has ever given themselves that useless trouble.”

Mrs. Thornton did not choose to yield the point to her son; or else she
had, in general, pride enough for her sex.

“Well! I only say, take care. Perhaps our Milton girls have too much
spirit and good feeling to go angling after husbands; but this Miss Hale
comes out of the aristocratic counties, where, if all tales be true,
rich husbands are reckoned prizes.”

Mr. Thornton’s brow contracted, and he came a step forward into the
room.

“Mother” (with a short scornful laugh), “you will make me confess. The
only time I saw Miss Hale, she treated me with a haughty civility which
had a strong flavour of contempt in it. She held herself aloof from me
as if she had been a queen, and I her humble, unwashed vassal. Be easy,
mother.”

“No! I am not easy nor content either. What business had she, a renegade
clergyman’s daughter, to turn up her nose at you! I would dress for none
of them—a saucy set! if I were you.” As he was leaving the room he
said:—

“Mr. Hale is good, and gentle, and learned. He is not saucy. As for Mrs.
Hale, I will tell you what she is like to-night, if you care to hear.”
He shut the door, and was gone.

“Despise my son! treat him as her vassal, indeed! Humph! I should like
to know where she could find such another! Boy and man, he’s the
noblest, stoutest heart I ever knew. I don’t care if I am his mother; I
can see what’s what, and not be blind. I know what Fanny is; and I know
what John is. Despise him! I hate her!”




CHAPTER X.

WROUGHT IRON AND GOLD.

    “We are the trees whom shaking fastens more.”
              GEORGE HERBERT.


Mr. Thornton left the house without coming into the dining-room again.
He was rather late, and walked rapidly out to Crampton. He was anxious
not to slight his new friend by any disrespectful unpunctuality. The
church-clock struck half-past seven as he stood at the door awaiting
Dixon’s slow movements; always doubly tardy when she had to degrade
herself by answering the door-bell. He was ushered into the little
drawing-room, and kindly greeted by Mr. Hale, who led him up to his
wife, whose pale face, and shawl-draped figure made a silent excuse for
the cold languor of her greeting. Margaret was lighting the lamp when he
entered, for the darkness was coming on. The lamp threw a pretty light
into the centre of the dusky room, from which, with country habits, they
did not exclude the night-skies, and the outer darkness of air. Somehow,
that room contrasted itself with the one he had lately left; handsome,
ponderous, with no sign of female habitation, except in the one spot
where his mother sate, and no convenience for any other employment than
eating and drinking. To be sure, it was a dining-room; his mother
preferred to sit in it; and her will was a household law. But the
drawing-room was not like this. It was twice—twenty times as fine; not
one quarter as comfortable. Here were no mirrors, not even a scrap of
glass to reflect the light, and answer the same purpose as water in a
landscape; no gilding; a warm, sober breadth of colouring, well relieved
by the dear old Helstone chintz-curtains and chair covers. An open
davenport stood in the window opposite the door; in the other there was
a stand, with a tall white china vase, from which drooped wreaths of
English ivy, pale green birch, and copper-coloured beech-leaves. Pretty
baskets of work stood about in different places: and books, not cared
for on account of their binding solely, lay on one table, as if recently
put down. Behind the door was another table decked out for tea, with a
white table-cloth, on which flourished the cocoa-nut cakes, and a basket
piled with oranges and ruddy American apples, heaped on leaves.

It appeared to Mr. Thornton that all these graceful cares were habitual
to the family; and especially of a piece with Margaret. She stood by the
tea-table in a light-coloured muslin gown, which had a good deal of pink
about it. She looked as if she was not attending to the conversation,
but solely busy with the tea-cups, among which her round ivory hands
moved with pretty, noiseless, daintiness. She had a bracelet on one
taper arm, which would fall down over her round wrist. Mr. Thornton
watched the replacing of this troublesome ornament with far more
attention than he listened to her father. It seemed as if it fascinated
him to see her push it up impatiently until it tightened her soft flesh;
and then to mark the loosening—the fall. He could almost have
exclaimed—“There it goes again!” There was so little left to be done
after he arrived at the preparation for tea, that he was almost sorry
the obligation of eating and drinking came so soon to prevent him
watching Margaret. She handed him his cup of tea with the proud air of
an unwilling slave; but her eye caught the moment when he was ready for
another cup; and he almost longed to ask her to do for him what he saw
her compelled to do for her father, who took her little finger and thumb
in his masculine hand, and made them serve as sugar-tongues. Mr.
Thornton saw her beautiful eyes lifted to her father, full of light,
half-laughter, and half-love, as this bit of pantomime went on between
the two, unobserved as they fancied, by any. Margaret’s head still
ached, as the paleness of her complexion, and her silence might have
testified; but she was resolved to throw herself into the breach, if
there was any long untoward pause, rather than that her father’s friend,
pupil, and guest should have cause to think himself in any way
neglected. But the conversation went on; and Margaret drew into a
corner, near her mother, with her work, after the tea-things were taken
away; and felt that she might let her thoughts roam, without fear of
being suddenly wanted to fill up a gap.

Mr. Thornton and Mr. Hale were both absorbed in the continuation of some
object which had been started at their last meeting. Margaret was
recalled to a sense of the present by some trivial, low-spoken remark of
her mother’s; and on suddenly looking up from her work, her eye was
caught by the difference of outward appearance between her father and
Mr. Thornton, as betokening such distinctly opposite natures. Her father
was of slight figure, which made him appear taller than he really was,
when not contrasted, as at this time, with the tall, massive frame of
another. The lines in her father’s face were soft and waving, with a
frequent undulating kind of trembling movement passing over them,
showing every fluctuating emotion; the eyelids were large and arched,
giving to the eyes a peculiar languid beauty which was almost feminine.
The brows were finely arched, but were by the very size of the dreamy
lids, raised to a considerable distance from the eyes. Now, in Mr.
Thornton’s face the straight brows fell low over the clear, deep-set,
earnest eyes, which without being unpleasantly sharp, seemed intent
enough to penetrate into the very heart and core of what he was looking
at. The lines in the face were few but firm, as if they were carved in
marble, and lay principally about the lips, which were slightly
compressed, over a set of teeth so faultless and beautiful as to give
the effect of sudden sunlight when the rare bright smile, coming in an
instant and shining out of the eyes, changed the whole look from the
severe and resolved expression of a man ready to do and dare everything,
to the keen, honest, enjoyment of the moment, which is seldom shown so
fearlessly and instantaneously except by children. Margaret liked this
smile; it was the first thing she had admired in this new friend of her
father’s; and the opposition of character, shown in all these details
of appearance she had just been noticing, seemed to explain the
attraction they evidently felt towards each other.

She rearranged her mother’s worsted-work, and fell back into her own
thoughts—as completely forgotten by Mr. Thornton as if she had not been
in the room, so thoroughly was he occupied in explaining to Mr. Hale the
magnificent power, yet delicate adjustment of the might of the
steam-hammer, which was recalling to Mr. Hale some of the wonderful
stories of subservient genii in the Arabian Nights—one moment
stretching from earth to sky and filling all the width of the horizon,
at the next obediently compressed into a vase small enough to be borne
in the hand of a child.

“And this imagination of power, this practical realisation of a gigantic
thought, came out of one man’s brain in our good town. That very man has
it within him to mount, step by step, on each wonder he achieves to
higher marvels still. And I’ll be bound to say, we have many among us
who, if he were gone, could spring into the breach and carry on the war
which compels, and shall compel, all material power to yield to
science.”

“Your boast reminds me of the old lines—

    ‘I’ve a hundred captains in England,’ he said,
      ‘As good as ever was he.’”

At her father’s quotation Margaret looked suddenly up, with inquiring
wonder in her eyes. How in the world had they got from the cog-wheels to
Chevy Chace?

“It is no boast of mine,” replied Mr. Thornton; “it is plain
matter-of-fact. I won’t deny that I am proud of belonging to a town—or
perhaps I should rather say a district—the necessities of which give
birth to such grandeur of conception. I would rather be a man toiling,
suffering—nay, failing and successless—here, than lead a dull
prosperous life in the old worn grooves of what you call more
aristocratic society down in the South, with their slow days of careless
ease. One may be clogged with honey and unable to rise and fly.”

“You are mistaken,” said Margaret, roused by the aspersion on her
beloved South to a fond vehemence of defence, that brought the colour
into her cheeks and the angry tears into her eyes. “You do not know
anything about the South. If there is less adventure or less progress—I
suppose I must not say less excitement—from the gambling spirit of
trade, which seems requisite to force out these wonderful inventions,
there is less suffering also. I see men here going about in the streets
who look ground down by some pinching sorrow or care—who are not only
sufferers but haters. Now, in the South we have our poor, but there is
not that terrible expression in their countenances of a sullen sense of
injustice which I see here. You do not know the South, Mr. Thornton,”
she concluded, collapsing into a determined silence, and angry with
herself for having said so much.

“And may I say you do not know the North?” asked he, with an
inexpressible gentleness in his tone, as he saw that he had really hurt
her. She continued resolutely silent; yearning after the lovely haunts
she had left far away in Hampshire, with a passionate longing that made
her feel her voice would be unsteady and trembling if she spoke.

“At any rate, Mr. Thornton,” said Mrs. Hale, “you will allow that Milton
is a much more smoky, dirty town than you will ever meet with in the
South.”

“I’m afraid I must give up its cleanliness,” said Mr. Thornton, with the
quick gleaming smile. “But we are bidden by parliament to burn our own
smoke; so I suppose, like good little children, we shall do as we are
bid—some time.”

“But I think you told me you had altered your chimneys so as to consume
the smoke, did you not?” asked Mr. Hale.

“Mine were altered by my own will, before parliament meddled with the
affair. It was an immediate outlay, but it repays me in the saving of
coal. I’m not sure whether I should have done it, if I had waited until
the act was passed. At any rate, I should have waited to be informed
against and fined, and given all the trouble in yielding that I legally
could. But all laws which depend for their enforcement upon informers
and fines, become inert from the odiousness of the machinery. I doubt if
there has been a chimney in Milton informed against for five years past,
although some are constantly sending out one-third of their coal in what
is called here unparliamentary smoke.”

“I only know it is impossible to keep the muslin blinds clean here above
a week together; and at Helstone we have had them up for a month or
more, and they have not looked dirty at the end of that time. And as for
hands—Margaret, how many times did you say you had washed your hands
this morning before twelve o’clock? Three times, was it not?”

“Yes, mamma.”

“You seem to have a strong objection to acts of parliament and all
legislation affecting your mode of management down here at Milton,” said
Mr. Hale.

“Yes, I have; and many others have as well. And with justice, I think.
The whole machinery—I don’t mean the wood and iron machinery now—of
the cotton trade is so new that it is no wonder if it does not work well
in every part all at once. Seventy years ago what was it? And now what
it is not? Raw, crude materials came together; men of the same level, as
regarded education and station, took suddenly the different position of
masters and men, owing to the motherwit, as regarded opportunities and
probabilities, which distinguished some, and made them far-seeing as to
what great future lay concealed in that rude model of Sir Richard
Arkwright’s. The rapid development of what might be called a new trade,
gave those early masters enormous power of wealth and command. I don’t
mean merely over the workmen; I mean over purchasers—over the whole
world’s market. Why, I may give you, as an instance, an advertisement,
inserted not fifty years ago in a Milton paper, that so-and-so (one of
the half-dozen calico-printers of the time) would close his warehouse at
noon each day; therefore, that all purchasers must come before that
hour. Fancy a man dictating in this manner the time when he would sell
and when he would not sell. Now, I believe, if a good customer chose to
come at midnight, I should get up, and stand hat in hand to receive his
orders.”

Margaret’s lip curled, but somehow she was compelled to listen; she
could no longer abstract herself in her own thoughts.

“I only name such things to show what almost unlimited power the
manufacturers had about the beginning of this century. The men were
rendered dizzy by it. Because a man was successful in his ventures,
there was no reason that in all other things his mind should be
well-balanced. On the contrary, his sense of justice, and his
simplicity, were often utterly smothered under the glut of wealth that
came down upon him; and they tell strange tales of the wild extravagance
of living indulged in on gala-days by those early cotton-lords. There
can be no doubt, too, of the tyranny they exercised over their
work-people. You know the proverb, Mr. Hale, ‘Set a beggar on horseback,
and he’ll ride to the devil,’—well, some of these early manufacturers
did ride to the devil in a magnificent style—crushing human bone and
flesh under their horses’ hoofs without remorse. But by-and-by came a
reaction; there were more factories, more masters; more men were wanted.
The power of masters and men became more evenly balanced; and now the
battle is pretty fairly waged between us. We will hardly submit to the
decision of an umpire, much less to the interference of a meddler with
only a smattering of the knowledge of the real facts of the case, even
though that meddler be called the High Court of Parliament.”

“Is there necessity for calling it a battle between the two classes?”
asked Mr. Hale. “I know, from your using the term, it is one which gives
a true idea of the real state of things to your mind.”

“It is true; and I believe it to be as much a necessity as that prudent
wisdom and good conduct are always opposed to, and doing battle with
ignorance and improvidence. It is one of the great beauties of our
system, that a working-man may raise himself into the power and position
of a master by his own exertions and behaviour; that, in fact, every one
who rules himself to decency and sobriety of conduct, and attention to
his duties, comes over to our ranks; it may not be always as a master,
but as an overlooker, a cashier, a book-keeper, a clerk, one on the side
of authority and order.”

“You consider all who are unsuccessful in raising themselves in the
world, from whatever cause, as your enemies, then, if I understand you
rightly,” said Margaret, in a clear, cold voice.

“As their own enemies, certainly,” said he, quickly, not a little
piqued by the haughty disapproval her form of expression and tone of
speaking implied. But, in a moment, his straightforward honesty made him
feel that his words were but a poor and quibbling answer to what she had
said, and, be she as scornful as she liked, it was a duty he owed to
himself to explain, as truly as he could, what he did mean. Yet it was
very difficult to separate her interpretation, and keep it distinct from
his meaning. He could best have illustrated what he wanted to say by
telling them something of his own life; but was it not too personal a
subject to speak about to strangers? Still, it was the simple
straightforward way of explaining his meaning; so, putting aside the
touch of shyness that brought a momentary flush of colour into his dark
cheek, he said:

“I am not speaking without book. Sixteen years ago, my father died under
very miserable circumstances. I was taken from school, and had to become
a man (as well as I could) in a few days. I had such a mother as few are
blest with; a woman of strong power, and firm resolve. We went into a
small country town, where living was cheaper than in Milton, and where I
got employment in a draper’s shop (a capital place, by the way, for
obtaining a knowledge of goods). Week by week, our income came to
fifteen shillings, out of which three people had to be kept. My mother
managed so that I put by three out of these fifteen shillings regularly.
This made the beginning; this taught me self-denial. Now that I am able
to afford my mother such comforts as her age, rather than her own wish,
requires, I thank her silently on each occasion for the early training
she gave me. Now when I feel that in my own case it is no good luck, nor
merit, nor talent,—but simply the habits of life which taught me to
despise indulgences not thoroughly earned,—indeed, never to think twice
about them,—I believe that this suffering, which Miss Hale says is
impressed on the countenances of the people of Milton, is but the
natural punishment of dishonestly-enjoyed pleasure, at some former
period of their lives. I do not look on self-indulgent, sensual people
as worthy of my hatred; I simply look upon them with contempt for their
poorness of character.”

“But you have the rudiments of a good education,” remarked Mr. Hale.
“The quick zest with which you are now reading Homer, shows me that you
do not come to it as an unknown book: you have read it before, and are
only recalling your old knowledge.”

“That is true,—I had blundered along it at school; I dare say, I was
even considered a pretty fair classic in those days, though my Latin and
Greek have slipt away from me since. But I ask you, what preparation
were they for such a life as I had to lead? None at all. Utterly none at
all. On the point of education, any man who can read and write starts
fair with me in the amount of really useful knowledge that I had at that
time.”

“Well! I don’t agree with you. But there I am perhaps somewhat of a
pedant. Did not the recollection of the heroic simplicity of the Homeric
life nerve you up?”

“Not one bit!” exclaimed Mr. Thornton, laughing. “I was too busy to
think about any dead people, with the living pressing alongside of me,
neck to neck, in the struggle for bread. Now that I have my mother safe
in the quiet peace that becomes her age, and duly rewards her former
exertions, I can turn to all that old narration and thoroughly enjoy
it.”

“I dare say, my remark came from the professional feeling of there being
nothing like leather,” replied Mr. Hale.

When Mr. Thornton rose up to go away, after shaking hands with Mr. and
Mrs. Hale, he made an advance to Margaret to wish her good-bye in a
similar manner. It was the frank familiar custom of the place; but
Margaret was not prepared for it. She simply bowed her farewell;
although the instant she saw the hand, half put out, quickly drawn back,
she was sorry she had not been aware of the intention. Mr. Thornton,
however, knew nothing of her sorrow, and, drawing himself up to his full
height, walked off, muttering as he left the house—

“A more proud, disagreeable girl I never saw. Even her great beauty is
blotted out of one’s memory by her scornful ways.”




CHAPTER XI.

FIRST IMPRESSIONS.

    “There’s iron, they say, in all our blood,
    And a grain or two perhaps is good;
    But his, he makes me harshly feel,
    Has got a little too much of steel.”
              ANON.


“Margaret!” said Mr. Hale as he returned from showing his guest
downstairs; “I could not help watching your face with some anxiety, when
Mr. Thornton made his confession of having been a shop-boy. I knew it
all along from Mr. Bell; so I was aware of what was coming; but I half
expected to see you get up and leave the room.”

“Oh, papa! you don’t mean that you thought me so silly? I really liked
that account of himself better than anything else he said. Everything
else revolted me, from its hardness; but he spoke about himself so
simply—with so little of the pretence that makes the vulgarity of
shop-people, and with such tender respect for his mother, that I was
less likely to leave the room then than when he was boasting about
Milton, as if there was not such another place in the world; or quietly
professing to despise people for careless, wasteful improvidence,
without ever seeming to think it his duty to try to make them
different,—to give them anything of the training which his mother gave
him, and to which he evidently owes his position, whatever that may be.
No! his statement of having been a shop-boy was the thing I liked best
of all.”

“I am surprised at you, Margaret,” said her mother. “You who were always
accusing people of being shoppy at Helstone! I don’t think, Mr. Hale,
you have done quite right in introducing such a person to us without
telling us what he had been. I really was very much afraid of showing
him how much shocked I was at some parts of what he said. His father
‘dying in miserable circumstances.’ Why it might have been in the
workhouse.”

“I am not sure it was not worse than being in the workhouse,” replied
her husband. “I heard a good deal of his previous life from Mr. Bell
before we came here; and as he has told you a part, I will fill up what
he left out. His father speculated wildly, failed, and then killed
himself, because he could not bear the disgrace. All his former friends
shrunk from the disclosures that had to be made of his dishonest
gambling—wild, hopeless struggles, made with other people’s money, to
regain his own moderate portion of wealth. No one came forward to help
the mother and this boy. There was another child, I believe, a girl; too
young to earn money, but of course she had to be kept. At least, no
friend came forward immediately, and Mrs. Thornton is not one, I fancy,
to wait till tardy kindness comes to find her out. So they left Milton.
I knew he had gone into a shop, and that his earnings, with some
fragment of property secured to his mother, had been made to keep them
for a long time. Mr. Bell said they absolutely lived upon water-porridge
for years—how, he did not know; but long after the creditors had given
up hope of any payment of old Mr. Thornton’s debts (if, indeed, they
ever had hoped at all about it, after his suicide), this young man
returned to Milton, and went quietly round to each creditor, paying him
the first instalment of the money owing to him. No noise—no gathering
together of creditors—it was done very silently and quietly, but all
was paid at last; helped on materially by the circumstance of one of the
creditors, a crabbed old fellow (Mr. Bell says), taking in Mr. Thornton
as a kind of partner.”

“That really is fine,” said Margaret. “What a pity such a nature should
be tainted by his position as a Milton manufacturer.”

“How tainted?” asked her father.

“Oh, papa, by that testing everything by the standard of wealth. When he
spoke of the mechanical powers, he evidently looked upon them only as
new ways of extending trade and making money. And the poor men around
him—they were poor because they were vicious—out of the pale of his
sympathies because they had not his iron nature, and the capabilities
that it gives him for being rich.”

“Not vicious; he never said that. Improvident and self-indulgent were
his words.”

Margaret was collecting her mother’s working materials, and preparing to
go to bed. Just as she was leaving the room, she hesitated—she was
inclined to make an acknowledgment which she thought would please her
father, but which to be full and true must include a little annoyance.
However, out it came.

“Papa, I do think Mr. Thornton a very remarkable man; but personally I
don’t like him at all.”

“And I do!” said her father laughing. “Personally, as you call it, and
all. I don’t set him up for a hero, or anything of that kind. But
good-night, child. Your mother looks sadly tired to-night, Margaret.”

Margaret had noticed her mother’s jaded appearance with anxiety for some
time past, and this remark of her father’s sent her up to bed with a dim
fear lying like a weight on her heart. The life in Milton was so
different from what Mrs. Hale had been accustomed to live in Helstone,
in and out perpetually into the fresh and open air; the air itself was
so different, deprived of all revivifying principle as it seemed to be
here; the domestic worries pressed so very closely, and in so new and
sordid a form, upon all the women in the family, that there was good
reason to fear that her mother’s health might be becoming seriously
affected. There were several other signs of something wrong about Mrs.
Hale. She and Dixon held mysterious consultations in her bedroom, from
which Dixon would come out crying and cross, as was her custom when any
distress of her mistress called upon her sympathy. Once Margaret had
gone into the chamber soon after Dixon left it, and found her mother on
her knees, and as Margaret stole out she caught a few words which were
evidently a prayer for strength and patience to endure severe bodily
suffering. Margaret yearned to re-unite the bond of intimate confidence
which had been broken by her long residence at her aunt Shaw’s, and
strove by gentle caresses and softened words to creep into the warmest
place in her mother’s heart. But though she received caresses and fond
words back again, in such profusion as would have gladdened her
formerly, yet she felt that there was a secret withheld from her, and
she believed it bore serious reference to her mother’s health. She lay
awake very long this night, planning how to lessen the evil influence of
their Milton life on her mother. A servant to give Dixon permanent
assistance should be got, if she gave up her whole time to the search;
and then, at any rate, her mother might have all the personal attention
she required, and had been accustomed to her whole life.

Visiting register offices, seeing all manner of unlikely people, and
very few in the least likely, absorbed Margaret’s time and thoughts for
several days. One afternoon she met Bessy Higgins in the street, and
stopped to speak to her.

“Well, Bessy, how are you? Better, I hope, now the wind has changed.”

“Better and not better, if yo’ know what that means.”

“Not exactly,” replied Margaret, smiling.

“I’m better in not being torn to pieces by coughing o’ nights, but I’m
weary and tired o’ Milton, and longing to get away to the land o’
Beulah? and when I think I’m farther and farther off, my heart sinks,
and I’m no better; I’m worse.”

Margaret turned round to walk alongside of the girl in her feeble
progress homeward. But for a minute or two she did not speak. At last
she said in a low voice,

“Bessy, do you wish to die?” For she shrank from death herself, with all
the clinging to life so natural to the young and healthy.

Bessy was silent in her turn for a minute or two. Then she replied,

“If yo’d led the life I have, and getten as weary of it as I have, and
thought at times, ‘maybe it’ll last for fifty or sixty years—it does
wi’ some,’—and got dizzy and dazed, and sick, as each of them sixty
years seemed to spin about me, and mock me with its length of hours and
minutes, and endless bits o’ time—oh, wench! I tell thee thou’d been
glad enough when th’ doctor said he feared thou’d never see another
winter.”

“Why, Bessy, what kind of a life has yours been?”

“Nought worse than many others’, I reckon. Only I fretted against it,
and they didn’t.”

“But what was it? You know, I’m a stranger here, so perhaps I’m not so
quick at understanding what you mean as if I’d lived all my life at
Milton.”

“If yo’d ha’ come to our house when yo’ said yo’ would, I could maybe
ha’ told you. But father says yo’re just like th’ rest on ’em; its out
o’ sight out o’ mind wi’ you.”

“I don’t know who the rest are; and I’ve been very busy; and, to tell
the truth, I had forgotten my promise—”

“Yo’ offered it; we asked none of it.”

“I had forgotten what I said for the time,” continued Margaret quietly.
“I should have thought of it again when I was less busy. May I go with
you now?”

Bessy gave a quick glance at Margaret’s face, to see if the wish
expressed was really felt. The sharpness in her eye turned to a wistful
longing as she met Margaret’s soft and friendly gaze.

“I ha’ none so many to care for me; if yo’ care yo’ may come.”

So they walked on together in silence. As they turned up into a small
court, out of a squalid street, Bessy said,

“Yo’ll not be daunted if father’s at home, and speaks a bit gruffish at
first. He took a mind to ye, yo’ see, and he thought a deal o’ your
coming to see us; and just because he liked yo’ he was vexed and put
about.”

“Don’t fear, Bessy.”

But Nicholas was not at home when they entered. A great slatternly girl,
not so old as Bessy, but taller and stronger, was busy at the wash-tub,
knocking about the furniture in a rough capable way, but altogether
making so much noise that Margaret shrunk, out of sympathy with poor
Bessy, who had sat down on the first chair, as if completely tired out
with her walk. Margaret asked the sister for a cup of water, and while
she ran to fetch it (knocking down the fire-irons, and tumbling over a
chair in her way), she unloosed Bessy’s bonnet strings, to relieve her
catching breath.

“Do you think such life as this is worth caring for?” gasped Bessy, at
last. Margaret did not speak, but held the water to her lips. Bessy took
a long and feverish draught, and then fell back and shut her eyes.
Margaret heard her murmur to herself: “They shall hunger no more,
neither thirst any more: neither shall the sun light on them, nor any
heat.”

Margaret bent over and said, “Bessy don’t be impatient with your life,
whatever it is—or may have been. Remember who gave it you, and made it
what it is!”

She was startled by hearing Nicholas speak behind her; he had come in
without her noticing him.

“Now, I’ll not have my wench preached to. She’s bad enough, as it is,
with her dreams and her methodee fancies, and her visions of cities with
goulden gates and precious stones. But if it amuses her I let it abe,
but I’m none going to have more stuff poured into her.”

“But surely,” said Margaret, facing round, “you believe in what I said,
that God gave her life, and ordered what kind of life it was to be?”

“I believe what I see, and no more. That’s what I believe, young woman.
I don’t believe all I hear—no! not by a big deal. I did hear a young
lass make an ado about knowing where we lived, and coming to see us. And
my wench here thought a deal about it, and flushed up many a time, when
hoo little knew as I was looking at her, at the sound of a strange step.
But hoo’s come at last,—and hoo’s welcome, as long as hoo’ll keep from
preaching on what hoo knows nought about.”

Bessy had been watching Margaret’s face; she half sate up to speak now,
laying her hand on Margaret’s arm with a gesture of entreaty. “Don’t be
vexed wi’ him—there’s many a one thinks like him: many and many a one
here. If yo’ could hear them speak, yo’d not be shocked at him; he’s a
rare good man, is father—but oh!” said she, falling back in despair,
“what he says at times makes me long to die more than ever, for I want
to know so many things, and am so tossed about wi’ wonder.”

“Poor wench—poor old wench—I’m loth to vex thee, I am; but a man mun
speak out for the truth, and when I see the world going all wrong at
this time o’ day, bothering itself wi’ things it knows nought about, and
leaving undone all the things that lie in disorder close at its
hand—why, I say, leave a’ this talk about religion alone, and set to
work on what yo’ see and know. That’s my creed. It’s simple, and not far
to fetch, nor hard to work.”

But the girl only pleaded the more with Margaret.

“Don’t think hardly on him—he’s a good man, he is. I sometimes think I
shall be moped wi’ sorrow even in the City of God, if father is not
there.” The feverish colour came into her cheek, and the feverish flame
into her eye. “But you will be there, father! you shall! Oh! my heart!”
She put her hand to it, and became ghastly pale.

Margaret held her in her arms, and put the weary head to rest upon her
bosom. She lifted the thin soft hair from off the temples, and bathed
them with water. Nicholas understood all her signs for different
articles with the quickness of love, and even the round-eyed sister
moved with laborious gentleness at Margaret’s “hush!” Presently the
spasm that foreshadowed death had passed away, and Bessy roused herself
and said,—

“I’ll go to bed,—it’s best place; but,” catching at Margaret’s gown,
“yo’ll come again,—I know yo’ will—but just say it!”

“I will come again to-morrow,” said Margaret.

Bessy leant back against her father, who prepared to carry her upstairs;
but as Margaret rose to go, he struggled to say something; “I could wish
there were a God, if it were only to ask Him to bless thee.”

Margaret went away very sad and thoughtful.

She was late for tea at home. At Helstone unpunctuality at meal-times
was a great fault in her mother’s eyes; but now this, as well as many
other little irregularities, seemed to have lost their power of
irritation, and Margaret almost longed for the old complainings.

“Have you met with a servant, dear?”

“No, mamma; that Anne Buckley would never have done.”

“Suppose I try,” said Mr. Hale. “Everybody else has had their turn at
this great difficulty. Now let me try. I may be the Cinderella to put on
the slipper after all.”

Margaret could hardly smile at this little joke, so oppressed was she by
her visit to the Higginses.

“What would you do, papa? How would you set about it?”

“Why, I should apply to some good house-mother to recommend me one known
to herself or her servants.”

“Very good. But we must first catch our house-mother.”

“You have caught her. Or rather she is coming into the snare, and you
will catch her to-morrow, if you’re skilful.”

“What do you mean, Mr. Hale?” asked his wife, her curiosity aroused.

“Why, my paragon pupil (as Margaret calls him) has told me that his
mother intends to call on Mrs. and Miss Hale to-morrow.”

“Mrs. Thornton!” exclaimed Mrs. Hale.

“The mother of whom he spoke to us?” said Margaret.

“Mrs. Thornton; the only mother he has, I believe,” said Mr. Hale,
quietly.

“I shall like to see her. She must be an uncommon person,” her mother
added. “Perhaps she may have a relation who might suit us, and be glad
of our place. She sounded to be such a careful economical person, that I
should like any one out of the same family.”

“My dear,” said Mr. Hale alarmed. “Pray don’t go off on that idea. I
fancy Mrs. Thornton is as haughty and proud in her way as our little
Margaret here is in hers, and that she completely ignores that old time
of trial, and poverty, and economy, of which he speaks so openly. I am
sure, at any rate, she would not like strangers to know anything about
it.”

“Take notice that is not my kind of haughtiness, papa, if I have any at
all; which I don’t agree to, though you’re always accusing me of it.”

“I don’t know positively that it is hers either; but from little things
I have gathered from him, I fancy so.”

They cared too little to ask in what manner her son had spoken about
her. Margaret only wanted to know if she must stay in to receive this
call, as it would prevent her going to see how Bessy was, until late in
the day, since the early morning was always occupied in household
affairs; and then she recollected that her mother must not be left to
have the whole weight of entertaining her visitor.




CHAPTER XII.

MORNING CALLS.

    “Well—I suppose we must.”
              FRIENDS IN COUNCIL.


Mr. Thornton had had some difficulty in working up his mother to the
desired point of civility. She did not often make calls; and when she
did, it was in heavy state that she went through her duties. Her son had
given her a carriage; but she refused to let him keep horses for it;
they were hired for the solemn occasions, when she paid morning or
evening visits. She had had horses for three days, not a fortnight
before, and had comfortably “killed off” all her acquaintances, who
might now put themselves to trouble and expense in their turn. Yet
Crampton was too far off for her to walk; and she had repeatedly
questioned her son as to whether his wish that she should call on the
Hales was strong enough to bear the expense of cab-hire. She would have
been thankful if it had not; for, as she said, “she saw no use in making
up friendships and intimacies with all the teachers and masters in
Milton; why, he would be wanting her to call on Fanny’s dancing-master’s
wife, the next thing!”

“And so I would, mother, if Mr. Mason and his wife were friendless in a
strange place, like the Hales.”

“Oh! you need not speak so hastily. I am going to-morrow. I only wanted
you exactly to understand about it.”

“If you are going to-morrow, I shall order horses.”

“Nonsense, John. One would think you were made of money.”

“Not quite, yet. But about the horses I’m determined. The last time you
were out in a cab, you came home with a headache from the jolting.”

“I never complained of it, I’m sure.”

“No! my mother is not given to complaints,” said he, a little proudly.
“But so much the more I have to watch over you. Now, as for Fanny there,
a little hardship would do her good.”

“She is not made of the same stuff as you are, John. She could not bear
it.”

Mrs. Thornton was silent after this; for her last words bore relation to
a subject which mortified her. She had an unconscious contempt for a
weak character; and Fanny was weak in the very points in which her
mother and brother were strong. Mrs. Thornton was not a woman much
given to reasoning; her quick judgment and firm resolution served her in
good stead of any long arguments and discussions with herself; she felt
instinctively that nothing could strengthen Fanny to endure hardships
patiently, or face difficulties bravely; and though she winced as she
made this acknowledgment to herself about her daughter, it only gave her
a kind of pitying tenderness of manner towards her; much of the same
description of demeanour with which mothers are wont to treat their weak
and sickly children. A stranger, a careless observer might have
considered that Mrs. Thornton’s manner to her children betokened far
more love to Fanny than to John. But such a one would have been deeply
mistaken. The very daringness with which mother and son spoke out
unpalatable truths, the one to the other, showed a reliance on the firm
centre of each other’s souls, which the uneasy tenderness of Mrs.
Thornton’s manner to her daughter, the shame with which she thought to
hide the poverty of her child in all the grand qualities which she
herself possessed unconsciously, and which she set so high a value upon
in others—this shame, I say, betrayed the want of a secure
resting-place for her affection. She never called her son by any name
but John; “love,” and “dear,” and such like terms, were reserved for
Fanny. But her heart gave thanks for him day and night; and she walked
proudly among women for his sake.

“Fanny dear! I shall have horses to the carriage to-day, to go and call
on these Hales. Should not you go and see nurse? It’s in the same
direction, and she’s always so glad to see you. You could go on there
while I am at Mrs. Hale’s.”

“Oh! mamma, it’s such a long way, and I am so tired.”

“With what?” asked Mrs. Thornton, her brow slightly contracting.

“I don’t know—the weather, I think. It is so relaxing. Couldn’t you
bring nurse here, mamma? The carriage could fetch her, and she could
spend the rest of the day here, which I know she would like.”

Mrs. Thornton did not speak; but she laid her work on the table, and
seemed to think.

“It will be a long way for her to walk back at night!” she remarked, at
last.

“Oh, but I will send her home in a cab. I never thought of her walking.”

At this point, Mr. Thornton came in, just before going to the mill.

“Mother! I need hardly say, that if there is any little thing that could
serve Mrs. Hale as an invalid, you will offer it, I’m sure.”

“If I can find it out, I will. But I have never been ill myself, so I am
not much up to invalids’ fancies.”

“Well! here is Fanny then, who is seldom without an ailment. She will be
able to suggest something, perhaps—won’t you, Fan?”

“I have not always an ailment,” said Fanny, pettishly; “and I am not
going with mamma. I have a headache to-day, and I shan’t go out.”

Mr. Thornton looked annoyed. His mother’s eyes were bent on her work, at
which she was now stitching away busily.

“Fanny! I wish you to go,” said he, authoritatively. “It will do you
good, instead of harm. You will oblige me by going, without my saying
anything more about it.”

He went abruptly out of the room after saying this.

If he had stayed a minute longer, Fanny would have cried at his tone of
command, even when he used the words, “You will oblige me.” As it was,
she grumbled.

“John always speaks as if I fancied I was ill, and I am sure I never do
fancy any such thing. Who are these Hales that he makes such a fuss
about?”

“Fanny, don’t speak so of your brother. He has good reasons of some kind
or other, or he would not wish us to go. Make haste and put your things
on.”

But the little altercation between her son and her daughter did not
incline Mrs. Thornton more favourably towards “these Hales.” Her jealous
heart repeated her daughter’s question, “Who are they, that he is so
anxious we should pay them all this attention?” It came up like a burden
to a song, long after Fanny had forgotten all about it in the pleasant
excitement of seeing the effect of a new bonnet in the looking-glass.

Mrs. Thornton was shy. It was only of late years that she had had
leisure enough in her life to go into society; and as society she did
not enjoy it. As dinner-giving, and as criticising other people’s
dinners, she took satisfaction in it. But this going to make
acquaintance with strangers was a very different thing. She was ill at
ease, and looked more than usually stern and forbidding as she entered
the Hales’ little drawing-room.

Margaret was busy embroidering a small piece of cambric for some little
article of dress for Edith’s expected baby—“Flimsy, useless work,” as
Mrs. Thornton observed to herself. She liked Mrs. Hale’s double knitting
far better; that was sensible of its kind. The room altogether was full
of knick-knacks, which must take a long time to dust; and time to people
of limited income was money.

She made all these reflections as she was talking in her stately way to
Mrs. Hale, and uttering all the stereotyped commonplaces that most
people can find to say with their senses blindfolded. Mrs. Hale was
making rather more exertion in her answers, captivated by some real old
lace which Mrs. Thornton wore; “lace,” as she afterwards observed to
Dixon, “of that old English point which has not been made for this
seventy years, and which cannot be bought. It must have been an
heir-loom, and shows that she had ancestors.” So the owner of the
ancestral lace became worthy of something more than the languid exertion
to be agreeable to a visitor, by which Mrs. Hale’s efforts at
conversation would have been otherwise bounded. And presently, Margaret,
racking her brain to talk to Fanny, heard her mother and Mrs. Thornton
plunge into the interminable subject of servants.

“I suppose you are not musical,” said Fanny, “as I see no piano.”

“I am fond of hearing good music; I cannot play well myself; and papa
and mamma don’t care much about it; so we sold our old piano when we
came here.”

“I wonder how you can exist without one. It almost seems to me a
necessary of life.”

“Fifteen shillings a week, and three saved out of them!” thought
Margaret to herself. “But she must have been very young. She probably
has forgotten her own personal experience. But she must know of those
days.” Margaret’s manner had an extra tinge of coldness in it when she
next spoke.

“You have good concerts here, I believe.”

“Oh, yes! Delicious! Too crowded, that is the worst. The directors admit
so indiscriminately. But one is sure to hear the newest music there. I
always have a large order to give to Johnson’s, the day after a
concert.”

“Do you like new music simply for its newness, then?”

“Oh; one knows it is the fashion in London, or else the singers would
not bring it down here. You have been in London, of course.”

“Yes,” said Margaret, “I have lived there for several years.”

“Oh! London and the Alhambra are the two places I long to see!”

“London and the Alhambra!”

“Yes! ever since I read the Tales of the Alhambra. Don’t you know them?”

“I don’t think I do. But surely, it is a very easy journey to London.”

“Yes; but somehow,” said Fanny, lowering her voice, “mamma has never
been to London herself, and can’t understand my longing. She is very
proud of Milton; dirty, smoky place as I feel it to be. I believe she
admires it the more for those very qualities.”

“If it has been Mrs. Thornton’s home for some years, I can well
understand her loving it,” said Margaret, in her clear, bell-like voice.

“What are you saying about me, Miss Hale? May I inquire?”

Margaret had not the words ready for an answer to this question, which
took her a little by surprise, so Miss Thornton replied:

“Oh, mamma! we are only trying to account for your being so fond of
Milton.”

“Thank you,” said Mrs. Thornton. “I do not feel that my very natural
liking for the place where I was born and brought up,—and which has
since been my residence for some years, requires any accounting for.”

Margaret was vexed. As Fanny had put it, it did seem as if they had been
impertinently discussing Mrs. Thornton’s feelings; but she also rose up
against that lady’s manner of showing that she was offended.

Mrs. Thornton went on after a moment’s pause:

“Do you know anything of Milton, Miss Hale? Have you seen any of our
factories? our magnificent warehouses?”

“No!” said Margaret. “I have not seen anything of that description as
yet.”

Then she felt that, by concealing her utter indifference to all such
places, she was hardly speaking with truth; so she went on:

“I dare say, papa would have taken me before now if I had cared. But I
really do not find much pleasure in going over manufactories.”

“They are very curious places,” said Mrs. Hale, “but there is so much
noise and dirt always. I remember once going in a lilac silk to see
candles made, and my gown was utterly ruined.”

“Very probably,” said Mrs. Thornton, in a short displeased manner. “I
merely thought, that as strangers newly come to reside in a town which
has risen to eminence in the country, from the character and progress of
its peculiar business, you might have cared to visit some of the places
where it is carried on; places unique in the kingdom, I am informed. If
Miss Hale changes her mind and condescends to be curious as to the
manufactures of Milton, I can only say I shall be glad to procure her
admission to print-works, or reed-making, or the more simple operations
of spinning carried on in my son’s mill. Every improvement of machinery
is, I believe, to be seen there, in its highest perfection.”

“I am so glad you don’t like mills and manufactories, and all those kind
of things,” said Fanny, in a half-whisper, as she rose to accompany her
mother, who was taking leave of Mrs. Hale with rustling dignity.

“I think I should like to know all about them, if I were you,” replied
Margaret quietly.

“Fanny!” said her mother, as they drove away, “we will be civil to these
Hales: but don’t form one of your hasty friendships with the daughter.
She will do you no good, I see. The mother looks very ill, and seems a
nice, quiet kind of person.”

“I don’t want to form any friendship with Miss Hale, mamma,” said Fanny,
pouting. “I thought I was doing my duty by talking to her, and trying to
amuse her.”

“Well! at any rate John must be satisfied now.”




CHAPTER XIII.

SOFT BREEZE IN A SULTRY PLACE.

    “That doubt and trouble, fear and pain,
    And anguish, all, are shadows vain,
    That death itself shall not remain;

    That weary deserts we may tread,
    A dreary labyrinth may thread.
    Thro’ dark ways underground be led;

    Yet, if we will one Guide obey,
    The dreariest path, the darkest way
    Shall issue out in heavenly day;

    And we, on divers shores now cast,
    Shall meet, our perilous voyage past,
    All in our Father’s house at last!”
              R. C. TRENCH.


Margaret flew up stairs as soon as their visitors were gone, and put on
her bonnet and shawl, to run and inquire how Betsy Higgins was, and sit
with her as long as she could before dinner. As she went along the
crowded narrow streets, she felt how much of interest they had gained by
the simple fact of her having learnt to care for a dweller in them.

Mary Higgins, the slatternly younger sister, had endeavoured as well as
she could to tidy up the house for the expected visit. There had been
rough-stoning done in the middle of the floor, while the flags under the
chairs and table and round the walls retained their dark unwashed
appearance. Although the day was hot, there burnt a large fire in the
grate, making the whole place feel like an oven; Margaret did not
understand that the lavishness of coals was a sign of hospitable welcome
to her on Mary’s part, and thought that perhaps the oppressive heat was
necessary for Bessy. Bessy herself lay on a squab, or short sofa, placed
under the window. She was very much more feeble than on the previous
day, and tired with raising herself at every step to look out and see if
it was Margaret coming. And now that Margaret was there, and had taken a
chair by her, Bessy lay back silent, and content to look at Margaret’s
face, and touch her articles of dress, with a childish admiration of
their fineness of texture.

“I never knew why folk in the Bible cared for soft raiment afore. But it
must be nice to go dressed as yo’ do. It’s different fro’ common. Most
fine folk tire my eyes out wi’ their colours; but some how yours rest
me. Where did ye get this frock?”

“In London,” said Margaret, much amused.

“London! Have yo’ been in London?”

“Yes! I lived there for some years. But my home was in a forest; in the
country.”

“Tell me about it,” said Bessy. “I like to hear speak of the country,
and trees, and such like things.” She leant back, and shut her eyes,
and crossed her hands over her breast, lying at perfect rest, as if to
receive all the ideas Margaret could suggest.

Margaret had never spoken of Helstone since she left it, except just
naming the place incidentally. She saw it in dreams more vivid than
life, and as she fell away to slumber at nights her memory wandered in
all its pleasant places. But her heart was opened to this girl: “Oh,
Bessy, I loved the home we have left so dearly! I wish you could see it.
I cannot tell you half its beauty. There are great trees standing all
about it, with their branches stretching long and level, and making a
deep shade of rest even at noonday. And yet, though every leaf may seem
still, there is a continual rushing sound of movement all around—not
close at hand. Then sometimes the turf is as soft and fine as velvet;
and sometimes quite lush with the perpetual moisture of a little,
hidden, tinkling brook near at hand. And then in other parts there are
billowy ferns—whole stretches of fern; some in the green shadow; some
with long streaks of golden sunlight lying on them—just like the sea.”

“I have never seen the sea,” murmured Bessy. “But go on.”

“Then here and there, there are wide commons, high up as if above the
very tops of the trees—”

“I am glad of that. I felt smothered like down below. When I have gone
for an out, I’ve always wanted to get high up and see far away, and take
a deep breath o’ fulness in that air. I get smothered enough in Milton,
and I think the sound yo’ speak of among the trees, going on for ever
and ever, would send me dazed; it’s that made my head ache so in the
mill. Now on these commons, I reckon, there is but little noise?”

“No,” said Margaret; “nothing but here and there a lark high in the air.
Sometimes I used to hear a farmer speaking sharp and loud to his
servants; but it was so far away that it only reminded me pleasantly
that other people were hard at work in some distant place, while I just
sat on the heather and did nothing.”

“I used to think once that if I could have a day of doing nothing, to
rest me—a day in some quiet place like that yo’ speak on—it would
maybe set me up. But now I’ve had many days o’ idleness, and I’m just as
weary ’o them as I was o’ my work. Sometimes I’m so tired out I think I
cannot enjoy heaven without a piece of rest first. I’m rather afeard o’
going straight there without getting a good sleep in the grave to set me
up.”

“Don’t be afraid, Bessy,” said Margaret, laying her hand on the girl’s
hand; “God can give you more perfect rest than even idleness on earth,
or the dead sleep of the grave can do.”

Bessy moved uneasily; then she said:

“I wish father would not speak to me as he does. He means well, as I
telled yo’ yesterday, and tell yo’ again and again. But yo’ see, though
I don’t believe him a bit by day, yet by night—when I’m in a fever,
half asleep and half awake—it comes back upon me—oh! so bad! And I
think, if this should be th’ end of all, and if all I’ve been born for
is just to work my heart and my life away, and to sicken i’ this dree
place, wi’ them mill-noises in my ears for ever, until I could scream
out for them to stop, and let me have a little piece o’ quiet—and wi’
the fluff filling my lungs, until I thirst to death for one long deep
breath o’ the clear air yo’ speak on—and my mother gone, and I never
able to tell her again how I loved her, and o’ all my troubles—I think
if this life is th’ end, and there’s no God to wipe away all tears from
all eyes—yo’ wench, yo’!” said she, sitting up, and clutching
violently, almost fiercely, at Margaret’s hand, “I could go mad, and
kill yo, I could.” She fell back completely worn out with her passion.
Margaret knelt down by her.

“Bessy—we have a Father in Heaven.”

“I know it! I know it,” moaned she, turning her head uneasily from side
to side. “I’m very wicked. I’ve spoken very wickedly. Oh! don’t be
frightened by me and never come again. I would not harm a hair of your
head. And,” opening her eyes, and looking earnestly at Margaret, “I
believe, perhaps, more than yo’ do o’ what’s to come. I read the book o’
Revelations until I know it off by heart, and I never doubt when I’m
waking, and in my senses, of all the glory I’m to come to.”

“Don’t let us talk of what fancies come into your head when you are
feverish. I would rather hear something about what you used to do when
you were well.”

“I think I was well when mother died, but I have never been rightly
strong sin’ somewhere about that time. I began to work in a carding-room
soon after, and the fluff got into my lungs, and poisoned me.”

“Fluff?” said Margaret, inquiringly.

“Fluff,” repeated Bessy. “Little bits, as fly off fro’ the cotton, when
they’re carding it, and fill the air till it looks all fine white dust.
They say it winds rounds the lungs, and tightens them up. Anyhow,
there’s many a one as works in a carding-room, that falls into a waste,
coughing and spitting blood, because they’re just poisoned by the
fluff.”

“But can’t it be helped?” asked Margaret.

“I dunno. Some folk have a great wheel at one end o’ their carding-rooms
to make a draught, and carry off th’ dust; but that wheel costs a deal
of money—five or six hundred pounds, maybe, and brings in no profit; so
it’s but a few of th’ masters as will put ’em up; and I’ve heard tell o’
men who didn’t like working in places where there was a wheel, because
they said as how it made ’em hungry, at after they’d been long used to
swallowing fluff, to go without it, and that their wages ought to be
raised if they were to work in such places. So between masters and men
th’ wheels fall through. I know I wish there’d been a wheel in our
place, though.”

“Did not your father know about it?” asked Margaret.

“Yes! And he was sorry. But our factory were a good one on the whole;
and a steady likely set o’ people; and father was afeard of letting me
go to a strange place, for though yo’ would na think it now, many a one
then used to call me a gradely lass enough. And I did na like to be
reckoned nesh and soft, and Mary’s schooling were to be kept up, mother
said, and father he were always liking to buy books, and go to lectures
o’ one kind and another—all which took money—so I just worked on till
I shall ne’er get the whirr out o’ my ears, or the fluff out o’ my
throat i’ this world. That’s all.”

“How old are you?” asked Margaret.

“Nineteen, come July.”

“And I too am nineteen.” She thought more sorrowfully than Bessy did, of
the contrast between them. She could not speak for a moment or two for
the emotion she was trying to keep down.

“About Mary,” said Bessy. “I wanted to ask yo’ to be a friend to her.
She’s seventeen, but she’s th’ last on us. And I don’t want her to go to
th’ mill, and yet I dunno what she’s fit for.”

“She could not do”—Margaret glanced unconsciously at the uncleaned
corners of the room—“She could hardly undertake a servant’s place,
could she? We have an old faithful servant, almost a friend, who wants
help, but who is very particular; and it would not be right to plague
her with giving her any assistance that would really be an annoyance and
an irritation.”

“No, I see. I reckon yo’re right. Our Mary’s a good wench; but who has
she had to teach her what to do about a house? No mother, and me at the
mill till I was good for nothing but scolding her for doing badly what I
didn’t know how to do a bit. But I wish she could ha’ lived wi’ yo’, for
all that.”

“But even though she may not be exactly fitted to come and live with us
as a servant—and I don’t know about that—I will always try to be a
friend to her for your sake, Bessy. And now I must go. I will come again
as soon as I can; but if it should not be to-morrow, or the next day, or
even a week or a fortnight hence, don’t think I’ve forgotten you. I may
be busy.”

“I’ll know yo’ won’t forget me again. I’ll not mistrust yo’ no more. But
remember, in a week or a fortnight I may be dead and buried!”

“I’ll come again as soon as I can, Bessy,” said Margaret, squeezing her
hand tight. “But you’ll let me know if you get worse.”

“Ay, that will I,” said Bessy, returning the pressure.

From that day forwards Mrs. Hale became more and more of a suffering
invalid. It was now drawing near to the anniversary of Edith’s marriage,
and looking back upon the year’s accumulated heap of troubles, Margaret
wondered how they had been borne. If she could have anticipated them,
how she would have shrunk away and hid herself from the coming time! And
yet day by day had, of itself, and by itself, been very
endurable—small, keen, bright little spots of positive enjoyment having
come sparkling into the very middle of sorrows. A year ago, or when she
first went to Helstone, and first became silently conscious of the
querulousness in her mother’s temper, she would have groaned bitterly
over the idea of a long illness to be borne in a strange, desolate,
noisy, busy place, with diminished comforts on every side of the home
life. But with the increase of serious and just ground of complaint, a
new kind of patience had sprung up in her mother’s mind. She was gentle
and quiet in intense bodily suffering, almost in proportion as she had
been restless and depressed when there had been no real cause for grief.
Mr. Hale was in exactly that stage of apprehension which, in men of his
stamp, takes the shape of wilful blindness. He was more irritated than
Margaret had ever known him at his daughter’s expressed anxiety.

“Indeed, Margaret, you are growing fanciful! God knows I should be the
first to take the alarm if your mother were really ill; we always saw
when she had her headaches at Helstone, even without her telling us. She
looks quite pale and white when she is ill; and now she has a bright
healthy colour in her cheeks, just as she used to have when I first knew
her.”

“But papa,” said Margaret, with hesitation, “do you know I think that is
the flush of pain.”

“Nonsense, Margaret. I tell you, you are too fanciful. You are the
person not well, I think. Send for the doctor to-morrow for yourself;
and then, if it will make your mind easier, he can see your mother.”

“Thank you, dear papa. It will make me happier, indeed.” And she went up
to him to kiss him. But he pushed her away—gently enough, but still as
if she had suggested unpleasant ideas, which he should be glad to get
rid of as readily as he could of her presence. He walked uneasily up and
down the room.

“Poor Maria!” said he, half soliloquising, “I wish one could do right
without sacrificing others. I shall hate this town, and myself too, if
she——. Pray, Margaret, does your mother often talk to you of the old
places: of Helstone, I mean.”

“No, papa,” said Margaret, sadly.

“Then, you see, she can’t be fretting after them, eh? It has always been
a comfort to me to think that your mother was so simple and open that I
knew every little grievance she had. She never would conceal anything
seriously affecting her health from me: would she, eh, Margaret? I am
quite sure she would not. So don’t let me hear of these foolish morbid
ideas. Come, give me a kiss, and run off to bed.”

But she heard him pacing about (racooning, as she and Edith used to call
it) long after her slow and languid undressing was finished—long after
as she began to listen as she lay in bed.




CHAPTER XIV.

THE MEETING.

                        “I was used
    To sleep at nights as sweetly as a child,—
    Now if the wind blew rough, it made me start,
    And think of my poor boy tossing about
    Upon the roaring seas. And then I seemed
    To feel that it was hard to take him from me
    For such a little fault.”
                      SOUTHEY.


It was a comfort to Margaret about this time, to find that her mother
drew more tenderly and intimately towards her than she had ever done
since the days of her childhood. She took her to her heart as a
confidential friend—the post Margaret had always longed to fill, and
had envied Dixon for being preferred to. Margaret took pains to respond
to every call made upon her for sympathy—and they were many—even when
they bore relation to trifles which she would no more have noticed or
regarded herself than the elephant would perceive the little pin at his
feet, which yet he lifts carefully up at the bidding of his keeper. All
unconsciously Margaret drew near to a reward.

One evening, Mr. Hale being absent, her mother began to talk to her
about her brother Frederick, the very subject on which Margaret had
longed to ask questions, and almost the only one on which her timidity
overcame her natural openness. The more she wanted to hear about him,
the less likely she was to speak.

“Oh, Margaret, it was so windy last night! It came howling down the
chimney in our room! I could not sleep. I never can when there is such a
terrible wind. I got into a wakeful habit when poor Frederick was at
sea; and now, even if I don’t waken all at once, I dream of him in some
stormy sea, with great, clear, glass-green walls of waves on either side
his ship, but far higher than her very masts, curling over her with that
cruel, terrible white foam, like some gigantic crested serpent. It is an
old dream, but it always comes back on windy nights, till I am thankful
to waken, sitting straight and stiff up in bed with my terror. Poor
Frederick! He is on land now, so wind can do him no harm. Though I did
think it might shake down some of those tall chimneys.”

“Where is Frederick now, mamma? Our letters are directed to the care of
Messrs. Barbour, at Cadiz. I know: but where is he himself?”

“I can’t remember the name of the place, but he is not called Hale; you
must remember that, Margaret. Notice the F. D. in every corner of the
letters. He has taken the name of Dickenson. I wanted him to have been
called Beresford, to which he had a kind of right, but your father
thought he had better not. He might be recognised, you know, if he were
called by my name.”

“Mamma,” said Margaret, “I was at Aunt Shaw’s when it all happened; and
I suppose I was not old enough to be told plainly about it. But I should
like to know now, if I may—if it does not give you too much pain to
speak about it.”

“Pain! No,” replied Mrs. Hale, her cheek flushing. “Yet it is pain to
think that perhaps I may never see my darling boy again. Or else he did
right, Margaret. They may say what they like, but I have his own letters
to show, and I’ll believe him, though he is my son, sooner than any
court-martial on earth. Go to my little japan cabinet, dear, and in the
second left-hand drawer you will find a packet of letters.”

Margaret went. There were the yellow, sea-stained letters, with the
peculiar fragrance which ocean letters have. Margaret carried them back
to her mother, who untied the silken string with trembling fingers, and,
examining their dates, she gave them to Margaret to read, making her
hurried, anxious remarks on their contents, almost before her daughter
could have understood what they were.

“You see, Margaret, how from the very first he disliked Captain Reid. He
was second lieutenant in the ship—the Orion—in which Frederick sailed
the very first time. Poor little fellow, how well he looked in his
midshipman’s dress, with his dirk in his hand, cutting open all the
newspapers with it as if it were a paper-knife! But this Mr. Reid, as he
was then, seemed to take a dislike to Frederick from the very beginning.
And then—stay! these are the letters he wrote on board the Russell.
When he was appointed to her, and found his old enemy Captain Reid in
command, he did mean to bear all his tyranny patiently. Look! this is
the letter. Just read it, Margaret. Where is it he says—Stop—‘my
father may rely upon me, that I will bear with all proper patience
everything that one officer and gentleman can take from another. But
from my former knowledge of my present captain, I confess I look forward
with apprehension to a long course of tyranny on board the Russell.’ You
see, he promises to bear patiently, and I am sure he did, for he was the
sweetest-tempered boy, when he was not vexed, that could possibly be. Is
that the letter in which he speaks of Captain Reid’s impatience with the
men, for not going through the ship’s manœuvres as quickly as the
Avenger? You see, he says that they had many new hands on board the
Russell, while the Avenger had been nearly three years on the station,
with nothing to do but to keep slavers off, and work her men, till they
ran up and down the rigging like rats or monkeys.”

Margaret slowly read the letter, half illegible through the fading of
the ink. It might be—it probably was—a statement of Captain Reid’s
imperiousness in trifles, very much exaggerated by the narrator, who had
written it while fresh and warm from the scene of altercation. Some
sailors being aloft in the main-topsail rigging, the captain had ordered
them to race down, threatening the hindmost with the cat-of-nine tails.
He who was the farthest on the spar, feeling the impossibility of
passing his companions, and yet passionately dreading the disgrace of
the flogging, threw himself desperately down to catch a rope
considerably lower, failed, and fell senseless on the deck. He only
survived for a few hours afterwards, and the indignation of the ship’s
crew was at boiling point when young Hale wrote.

“But we did not receive this letter till long, long after we heard of
the mutiny. Poor Fred! I dare say it was a comfort to him to write it,
even though he could not have known how to send it, poor fellow! And
then we saw a report in the papers—that’s to say, long before Fred’s
letter reached us—of an atrocious mutiny having broken out on board the
Russell, and that the mutineers had remained in possession of the ship,
which had gone off, it was supposed, to be a pirate; and that Captain
Reid was sent adrift in a boat with some men—officers or
something—whose names were all given, for they were picked up by a West
Indian steamer. Oh, Margaret! how your father and I turned sick over
that list, when there was no name of Frederick Hale. We thought it must
be some mistake; for poor Fred was such a fine fellow, only perhaps
rather too passionate; and we hoped that the name of Carr, which was in
the list, was a misprint for that of Hale—newspapers are so careless.
And towards post-time the next day, papa set off to walk to Southampton
to get the papers; and I could not stop at home, so I went to meet him.
He was very late—much later than I thought he would have been; and I
sat down under the hedge to wait for him. He came at last, his arms
hanging loose down, his head sunk, and walking heavily along, as if
every step was a labour and a trouble. Margaret, I see him now.”

“Don’t go on, mamma. I can understand it all,” said Margaret, leaning up
caressingly against her mother’s side, and kissing her hand.

“No, you can’t, Margaret. No one can who did not see him then. I could
hardly lift myself up to go and meet him—everything seemed so to reel
around me all at once. And when I got to him, he did not speak, or seem
surprised to see me there, more than three miles from home, beside the
Oldham beech-tree; but he put my arm in his, and kept stroking my hand,
as if he wanted to soothe me to be very quiet under some great heavy
blow; and when I trembled so all over that I could not speak, he took me
in his arms, and stooped down his head on mine, and began to shake and
to cry in a strange muffled, groaning voice, till I, for very fright,
stood quite still, and only begging him to tell me what he had heard.
And then, with his hand jerking, as if some one else moved it against
his will, he gave me a wicked newspaper to read, calling our Frederick a
‘traitor of the blackest dye,’ ‘a base, ungrateful disgrace to his
profession.’ Oh! I cannot tell what bad words they did not use. I took
the paper in my hands as soon as I had read it—I tore it up to little
bits—I tore it—oh! I believe, Margaret, I tore it with my teeth. I did
not cry. I could not. My cheeks were as hot as fire, and my very eyes
burnt in my head. I saw your father looking grave at me. I said it was a
lie, and so it was. Months after, this letter came, and you see what
provocation Frederick had. It was not for himself, or his own injuries,
he rebelled; but he would speak his mind to Captain Reid, and so it
went on from bad to worse; and you see, most of the sailors stuck by
Frederick.

“I think, Margaret,” she continued, after a pause, in a weak, trembling,
exhausted voice, “I am glad of it—I am prouder of Frederick standing up
against injustice, than if he had been simply a good officer.”

“I am sure I am,” said Margaret, in a firm, decided tone. “Loyalty and
obedience to wisdom and justice are fine; but it is still finer to defy
arbitrary power, unjustly and cruelly used—not on behalf of ourselves,
but on behalf of others more helpless.”

“For all that, I wish I could see Frederick once more—just once. He was
my first baby, Margaret.” Mrs. Hale spoke wistfully, and almost as if
apologising for the yearning, craving wish, as though it were a
depreciation of her remaining child. But such an idea never crossed
Margaret’s mind. She was thinking how her mother’s desire could be
fulfilled.

“It is six or seven years ago—would they still prosecute him, mother?
If he came and stood his trial, what would be the punishment? Surely, he
might bring evidence of his great provocation.”

“It would do no good,” replied Mrs. Hale. “Some of the sailors who
accompanied Frederick were taken, and there was a court-martial held on
them on board the Amicia; I believed all they said in their defence,
poor fellows, because it just agreed with Frederick’s story—but it was
of no use,—” and for the first time during the conversation Mrs. Hale
began to cry; yet something possessed Margaret to force the information
she foresaw, yet dreaded, from her mother.

“What happened to them, mamma?” asked she.

“They were hung at the yard-arm,” said Mrs. Hale, solemnly. “And the
worst was that the court, in condemning them to death, said they had
suffered themselves to be led astray from their duty by their superior
officers.”

They were silent for a long time.

“And Frederick was in South America for several years, was he not?”

“Yes. And now he is in Spain. At Cadiz, or somewhere near it. If he
comes to England he will be hung. I shall never see his face again—for
if he comes to England he will be hung.”

There was no comfort to be given. Mrs. Hale turned her face to the wall,
and lay perfectly still in her mother’s despair. Nothing could be said
to console her. She took her hand out of Margaret’s with a little
impatient movement, as if she would fain be left alone with the
recollection of her son. When Mr. Hale came in, Margaret went out,
oppressed with gloom, and seeing no promise of brightness on any side of
the horizon.




CHAPTER XV

MASTERS AND MEN.

    “Thought fights with thought; out springs a spark of truth
    From the collision of the sword and shield.”
              W. S. LANDOR.


“Margaret,” said her father, the next day, “we must return Mrs.
Thornton’s call. Your mother is not very well, and thinks she cannot
walk so far; but you and I will go this afternoon.”

As they went, Mr. Hale began about his wife’s health, with a kind of
veiled anxiety, which Margaret was glad to see awakened at last.

“Did you consult the doctor, Margaret? Did you send for him?”

“No, papa, you spoke of his coming to see me. Now I was well. But if I
only knew of some good doctor, I would go this afternoon, and ask him to
come, for I am sure mamma is seriously indisposed.”

She put the truth thus plainly and strongly because her father had so
completely shut his mind against the idea, when she had last named her
fears. But now the case was changed. He answered in a despondent tone:

“Do you think she has any hidden complaint? Do you think she is really
very ill? Has Dixon said anything? Oh, Margaret! I am haunted by the
fear that our coming to Milton has killed her. My poor Maria!”

“Oh, papa! don’t imagine such things,” said Margaret, shocked. “She is
not well, that is all. Many a one is not well for a time; and with good
advice gets better and stronger than ever.”

“But has Dixon said anything about her?”

“No! You know Dixon enjoys making a mystery out of trifles; and she has
been a little mysterious about mamma’s health, which has alarmed me
rather, that is all. Without any reason I dare say. You know, papa, you
said the other day I was getting fanciful.”

“I hope and trust you are. But don’t think of what I said then. I like
you to be fanciful about your mother’s health! Don’t be afraid of
telling me your fancies. I like to hear them, though I dare say, I spoke
as if I was annoyed. But we will ask Mrs. Thornton if she can tell us of
a good doctor. We won’t throw away our money on any but some one
first-rate. Stay, we turn up this street.”

The street did not look as if it could contain any house large enough
for Mrs. Thornton’s habitation. Her son’s presence never gave any
impression as to the kind of house he lived in; but, unconsciously,
Margaret had imagined that tall, massive, handsomely dressed Mrs.
Thornton must live in a house of the same character as herself. Now
Marlborough Street consisted of long rows of small houses, with a blank
wall here and there; at least that was all they could see from the point
at which they entered it.

“He told me he lived in Marlborough Street, I’m sure,” said Mr. Hale,
with a much perplexed air.

“Perhaps it is one of the economies he still practises, to live in a
very small house. But here are plenty of people about; let me ask.”

She accordingly inquired of a passer-by, and was informed that Mr.
Thornton lived close to the mill, and had the factory lodge-door pointed
out to her, at the end of the long dead wall they had noticed.

The lodge-door was like a common garden-door; on one side of it were
great closed gates for the ingress and egress of lorries and wagons. The
lodge-keeper admitted them into a great oblong yard, on one side of
which were offices for the transaction of business; on the opposite, an
immense many-windowed mill, whence proceeded the continual clank of
machinery and the long groaning roar of the steam-engine, enough to
deafen those who lived within the enclosure. Opposite to the wall, along
which the street ran, on one of the narrow sides of the oblong, was a
handsome stone-coped house,—blackened, to be sure, by the smoke, but
with paint, windows, and steps kept scrupulously clean. It was evidently
a house which had been built some fifty or sixty years. The stone
facings—the long, narrow windows, and the number of them—the flights
of steps up to the front door, ascending from either side, and guarded
by railing—all witnessed to its age. Margaret only wondered why people
who could afford to live in so good a house, and keep it in such perfect
order, did not prefer a much smaller dwelling in the country, or even
some suburb; not in the continual whirl and din of the factory. Her
unaccustomed ears could hardly catch her father’s voice, as they stood
on the steps awaiting the opening of the door. The yard, too, with the
great doors in the dead wall as a boundary, was but a dismal look-out
for the sitting-rooms of the house—as Margaret found when they had
mounted the old-fashioned stairs, and been ushered into the
drawing-room, the three windows of which went over the front door and
the room on the right-hand side of the entrance. There was no one in the
drawing-room. It seemed as though no one had been in it since the day
when the furniture was bagged up with as much care as if the house was
to be overwhelmed with lava, and discovered a thousand years hence. The
walls were pink and gold; the pattern on the carpet represented bunches
of flowers on a light ground, but it was carefully covered up in the
centre by a linen drugget, glazed and colourless. The window-curtains
were lace; each chair and sofa had its own particular veil of netting or
knitting. Great alabaster groups occupied every flat surface, safe from
dust under their glass shades. In the middle of the room, right under
the bagged-up chandelier, was a large circular table, with smartly-bound
books arranged at regular intervals round the circumference of its
polished surface, like gaily coloured spokes of a wheel. Everything
reflected light, nothing absorbed it. The whole room had a painfully
spotted, spangled, speckled look about it, which impressed Margaret so
unpleasantly that she was hardly conscious of the peculiar cleanliness
required to keep everything so white and pure in such an atmosphere, or
of the trouble that must be willingly expended to secure that effect of
icy, snowy discomfort. Wherever she looked there was evidence of care
and labour, but not care and labour to procure ease, to help on habits
of tranquil home employment; solely to ornament and then to preserve
ornament from dirt or destruction.

They had leisure to observe, and to speak to each other in low voices,
before Mrs. Thornton appeared. They were talking of what all the world
might hear; but it is a common effect of such a room as this to make
people speak low, as if unwilling to awaken the unused echoes.

At last Mrs. Thornton came in, rustling in handsome black silk, as was
her wont; her muslins and laces rivalling, not excelling, the pure
whiteness of the muslins and netting of the room. Margaret explained how
it was that her mother could not accompany them to return Mrs.
Thornton’s call; but in her anxiety not to bring back her father’s fears
too vividly, she gave but a bungling account, and left the impression on
Mrs. Thornton’s mind that Mrs. Hale’s was some temporary or fanciful
fine-ladyish indisposition, which might have been put aside had there
been a strong enough motive; or that if it was too severe to allow her
to come out that day, the call might have been deferred. Remembering,
too, the horses to her carriage, hired for her own visit to the Hales,
and how Fanny had been ordered to go by Mr. Thornton, in order to pay
every respect to them, Mrs. Thornton drew up slightly offended, and gave
Margaret no sympathy—indeed, hardly any credit for the statement of her
mother’s indisposition.

“How is Mr. Thornton?” asked Mr. Hale. “I was afraid he was not well,
from his hurried note yesterday.”

“My son is rarely ill; and when he is, he never speaks about it, or
makes it an excuse for not doing anything. He told me he could not get
leisure to read with you last night, sir. He regretted it, I am sure; he
values the hours spent with you.”

“I am sure they are equally agreeable to me,” said Mr. Hale. “It makes
me feel young again to see his enjoyment and appreciation of all that is
fine in classical literature.”

“I have no doubt that classics are very desirable for people who have
leisure. But I confess, it was against my judgment that my son renewed
his study of them. The time and place in which he lives, seem to me to
require all his energy and attention. Classics may do very well for men
who loiter away their lives in the country or in colleges; but Milton
men ought to have their thoughts and powers absorbed in the work of
to-day. At least, that is my opinion.” This last clause she gave out
with “the pride that apes humility.”

“But, surely, if the mind is too long directed to one object only, it
will get stiff and rigid, and unable to take in many interests,” said
Margaret.

“I do not quite understand what you mean by a mind getting stiff and
rigid. Nor do I admire those whirligig characters that are full of this
thing to-day, to be utterly forgetful of it in their new interest
to-morrow. Having many interests does not suit the life of a Milton
manufacturer. It is or ought to be enough for him to have one great
desire, and to bring all the purposes of his life to bear on the
fulfilment of that.”

“And that is—?” asked Mr. Hale.

Her sallow cheek flushed, and her eye lightened, as she answered:

“To hold and maintain a high, honourable place among the merchants of
his country—the men of his town. Such a place my son has earned for
himself. Go where you will—I don’t say in England only, but in
Europe—the name of John Thornton of Milton is known and respected
amongst all men of business. Of course, it is unknown in the fashionable
circles,” she continued scornfully. “Idle gentlemen and ladies are not
likely to know much of a Milton manufacturer, unless he gets into
parliament, or marries a lord’s daughter.”

Both Mr. Hale and Margaret had an uneasy, ludicrous consciousness that
they had never heard of this great name, until Mr. Bell had written them
word that Mr. Thornton would be a good friend to have in Milton. The
proud mother’s world was not their world of Harley street gentilities on
the one hand, or country clergymen and Hampshire squires on the other.
Margaret’s face, in spite of all her endeavours to keep it simply
listening in its expression, told the sensitive Mrs. Thornton this
feeling of hers.

“You think you never heard of this wonderful son of mine, Miss Hale. You
think I’m an old woman whose ideas are hounded by Milton, and whose own
crow is the whitest ever seen.”

“No,” said Margaret, with some spirit. “It may be true that I was
thinking I had hardly heard Mr. Thornton’s name before I came to Milton.
But since I have come here, I have heard enough to make me respect and
admire him, and to feel how much justice and truth there is in what you
have said of him.”

“Who spoke to you of him?” asked Mrs. Thornton, a little mollified, yet
jealous lest any one else’s words should not have done him full justice.

Margaret hesitated before she replied. She did not like this
authoritative questioning. Mr. Hale came in, as he thought, to the
rescue.

“It was what Mr. Thornton said himself, that made us know the kind of
man he was. Was it not, Margaret?”

Mrs. Thornton drew herself up, and said—

“My son is not the one to tell of his own doings. May I again ask you,
Miss Hale, from whose account you formed your favourable opinion of him?
A mother is curious and greedy of commendation of her children, you
know.”

Margaret replied, “It was as much from what Mr. Thornton withheld of
that which we had been told of his previous life by Mr. Bell,—it was
more that than what he said, that made us all feel what reason you have
to be proud of him.”

“Mr. Bell! What can he know of John? He, living a lazy life in a drowsy
college. But I’m obliged to you, Miss Hale. Many a missy young lady
would have shrunk from giving an old woman the pleasure of hearing that
her son was well spoken of.”

“Why?” asked Margaret, looking straight at Mrs. Thornton, in
bewilderment.

“Why! because I suppose they might have consciences that told them how
surely they were making the old mother into an advocate for them, in
case they had any plans on the son’s heart.”

She smiled a grim smile, for she had been pleased by Margaret’s
frankness; and perhaps she felt that she had been asking questions too
much as if she had a right to catechise. Margaret laughed outright at
the notion presented to her; laughed so merrily that it grated on Mrs.
Thornton’s ear, as if the words that called forth that laugh, must have
been utterly and entirely ludicrous.

Margaret stopped her merriment as soon as she saw Mrs. Thornton’s
annoyed look.

“I beg your pardon, madam. But I really am very much obliged to you for
exonerating me from making any plans on Mr. Thornton’s heart.”

“Young ladies have, before now,” said Mrs. Thornton, stiffly.

“I hope Miss Thornton is well,” put in Mr. Hale, desirous of changing
the current of the conversation.

“She is as well as she ever is. She is not strong,” replied Mrs.
Thornton, shortly.

“And Mr. Thornton? I suppose I may hope to see him on Thursday?”

“I cannot answer for my son’s engagements. There is some uncomfortable
work going on in the town; a threatening of a strike. If so, his
experience and judgment will make him much consulted by his friends. But
I should think he could come on Thursday. At any rate, I am sure he will
let you know if he cannot.”

“A strike!” asked Margaret. “What for? What are they going to strike
for?”

“For the mastership and ownership of other people’s property,” said Mrs.
Thornton, with a fierce snort. “That is what they always strike for. If
my son’s work-people strike, I will only say they are a pack of
ungrateful hounds. But I have no doubt they will.”

“They are wanting higher wages, I suppose?” asked Mr. Hale.

“That is the face of the thing. But the truth is, they want to be
masters, and make the masters into slaves on their own ground. They are
always trying at it; they always have it in their minds; and every five
or six years, there comes a struggle between masters and men. They’ll
find themselves mistaken this time, I fancy,—a little out of their
reckoning. If they turn out, they mayn’t find it so easy to go in again.
I believe, the masters have a thing or two in their heads which will
teach the men not to strike again in a hurry, if they try it this time.”

“Does it make the town very rough?” asked Margaret.

“Of course it does. But surely you are not a coward, are you? Milton is
not the place for cowards. I have known the time when I have had to
thread my way through a crowd of white, angry men, all swearing they
would have Makinson’s blood as soon as he ventured to show his nose out
of his factory; and he, knowing nothing of it, some one had to go and
tell him, or he was a dead man; and it needed to be a woman,—so I went.
And when I got in, I could not get out. It was as much as my life was
worth. So I went up to the roof, where there were stones piled ready to
drop on the heads of the crowd, if they tried to force the factory
doors. And I would have lifted those heavy stones, and dropped them with
as good an aim as the best man there, but that I fainted with the heat I
had gone through. If you live in Milton, you must learn to have a brave
heart, Miss Hale.”

“I would do my best,” said Margaret rather pale. “I do not know whether
I am brave or not till I am tried; but I am afraid I should be a
coward.”

“South country people are often frightened by what our Darkshire men and
women only call living and struggling. But when you’ve been ten years
among a people who are always owing their betters a grudge, and only
waiting for an opportunity to pay it off, you’ll know whether you are a
coward or not, take my word for it.”

Mr. Thornton came that evening to Mr. Hale’s. He was shown up into the
drawing-room, where Mr. Hale was reading aloud to his wife and daughter.

“I am come partly to bring you a note from my mother, and partly to
apologise for not keeping to my time yesterday. The note contains the
address you asked for; Dr. Donaldson.”

“Thank you!” said Margaret, hastily, holding out her hand to take the
note, for she did not wish her mother to hear that they had been making
any inquiry about a doctor. She was pleased that Mr. Thornton seemed
immediately to understand her feeling; he gave her the note without
another word of explanation.

Mr. Hale began to talk about the strike. Mr. Thornton’s face assumed a
likeness to his mother’s worst expression, which immediately repelled
the watching Margaret.

“Yes; the fools will have a strike. Let them. It suits us well enough.
But we gave them a chance. They think trade is flourishing as it was
last year. We see the storm on the horizon and draw in our sails. But
because we don’t explain our reasons, they won’t believe we’re acting
reasonably. We must give them line and letter for the way we choose to
spend or save our money. Henderson tried a dodge with his men, out at
Ashley, and failed. He rather wanted a strike; it would have suited his
book well enough. So, when the men came to ask for the five per cent.
they are claiming, he told ’em he’d think about it, and give them his
answer on the pay day; knowing all the while what his answer would be,
of course, but thinking he’d strengthen their conceit of their own way.
However, they were too deep for him, and heard something about the bad
prospects of trade. So in they came on the Friday, and drew back their
claim, and now he’s obliged to go on working. But we Milton masters have
to-day sent in our decision. We won’t advance a penny. We tell them we
may have to lower wages; but can’t afford to raise. So here we stand,
waiting for their next attack.”

“And what will that be?” asked Mr. Hale.

“I conjecture a simultaneous strike. You will see Milton without smoke
in a few days, I imagine, Miss Hale.”

“But why,” asked she, “could you not explain what good reason you had
for expecting a bad trade? I don’t know whether I use the right words,
but you will understand what I mean.”

“Do you give your servants reasons for your expenditure, or your economy
in the use of your own money? We, the owners of capital, have a right to
choose what we will do with it.”

“A human right,” said Margaret, very low.

“I beg your pardon, I did not hear what you said.”

“I would rather not repeat it,” said she; “it related to a feeling which
I do not think you would share.”

“Won’t you try me?” pleaded he; his thoughts suddenly bent upon learning
what she had said. She was displeased with his pertinacity, but did not
choose to affix too much importance to her words.

“I said you had a human right. I meant that there seemed no reason but
religious ones, why you should not do what you like with your own.”

“I know we differ in our religious opinions; but don’t you give me
credit for having some, though not the same as yours?”

He was speaking in a subdued voice, as if to her alone. She did not wish
to be so exclusively addressed. She replied out in her usual tone:

“I do not think that I have any occasion to consider your special
religious opinions in the affair. All I meant to say is, that there is
no human law to prevent the employers from utterly wasting or throwing
away all their money, if they choose; but that there are passages in the
Bible which would rather imply—to me at least—that they neglected
their duties as stewards if they did so. However, I know so little about
strikes and rate of wages, and capital, and labour, that I had better
not talk to a political economist like you.”

“Nay, the more reason,” said he eagerly. “I shall only be too glad to
explain to you all that may seem anomalous or mysterious to a stranger;
especially at a time like this, when our doings are sure to be canvassed
by every scribbler who can hold a pen.”

“Thank you,” she answered, coldly. “Of course, I shall apply to my
father in the first instance for any information he can give me, if I
get puzzled with living here amongst this strange society.”

“You think it strange. Why?”

“I don’t know—I suppose because, on the very face of it, I see two
classes dependent on each other in every possible way, yet each
evidently regarding the interests of the other as opposed to their own:
I never lived in a place before where there were two sets of people
always running each other down.”

“Who have you heard running the masters down? I don’t ask who you have
heard abusing the men; for I see you persist in misunderstanding what I
said the other day. But who have you heard abusing the masters?”

Margaret reddened; then smiled as she said,

“I am not fond of being catechised. I refuse to answer your question.
Besides, it has nothing to do with the fact. You must take my word for
it, that I have heard some people, or, it may be, only some one of the
workpeople speak as though it were the interest of the employers to keep
them from acquiring money—that it would make them too independent if
they had a sum in the savings’ bank.”

“I dare say it was that man Higgins who told you all this,” said Mrs.
Hale. Mr. Thornton did not appear to hear what Margaret evidently did
not wish him to know. But he caught it nevertheless.

“I heard, moreover, that it was considered to the advantage of the
masters to have ignorant workmen—not hedge-lawyers, as Captain Lennox
used to call those men in his company who questioned and would know the
reason for every order.”

This latter part of her sentence she addressed rather to her father than
to Mr. Thornton. Who is Captain Lennox? asked Mr. Thornton of himself,
with a strange kind of displeasure, that prevented him for the moment
from replying to her! Her father took up the conversation.

“You never were fond of schools, Margaret, or you would have seen and
known before this how much is being done for education in Milton.”

“No!” she said, with sudden meekness. “I know I do not care enough about
schools. But the knowledge and the ignorance of which I was speaking did
not relate to reading and writing,—the teaching or information one can
give to a child. I am sure, that what was meant was ignorance of the
wisdom that shall guide men and women. I hardly know what that is. But
he—that is my informant—spoke as if the masters would like their hands
to be merely tall, large children—living in the present moment—with a
blind unreasoning kind of obedience.”

“In short, Miss Hale, it is very evident that your informant found a
pretty ready listener to all the slander he chose to utter against the
masters,” said Mr. Thornton, in an offended tone.

Margaret did not reply. She was displeased at the personal character Mr.
Thornton affixed to what she had said.

Mr. Hale spoke next:

“I must confess that, although I have not become so intimately
acquainted with any workmen as Margaret has, I am very much struck by
the antagonism between the employer and the employed, on the very
surface of things. I even gather this impression from what you yourself
have from time to time said.”

Mr. Thornton paused awhile before he spoke. Margaret had just left the
room, and he was vexed at the state of feeling between himself and her.
However, the little annoyance, by making him cooler and more thoughtful,
gave a greater dignity to what he said:

“My theory is, that my interests are identical with those of my
workpeople, and vice-versa. Miss Hale, I know, does not like to hear men
called ‘hands,’ so I won’t use that word, though it comes most readily
to my lips as the technical term, whose origin, whatever it was, dates
before my time. On some future day—in some millennium—in Utopia, this
unity may be brought into practice—just as I can fancy a republic the
most perfect form of government.”

“We will read Plato’s Republic as soon as we have finished Homer.”

“Well, in the Platonic year, it may fall out that we are all—men,
women, and children—fit for a republic; but give me a constitutional
monarchy in our present state of morals and intelligence. In our infancy
we require a wise despotism to govern us. Indeed, long past infancy,
children and young people are the happiest under the unfailing laws of a
discreet firm authority. I agree with Miss Hale so far as to consider
our people in the condition of children, while I deny that we, the
masters, have anything to do with the making or keeping them so. I
maintain that despotism is the best kind of government for them; so that
in the hours in which I come in contact with them I must necessarily be
an autocrat. I will use my best discretion—from no humbug or
philanthropic feeling, of which we have had rather too much in the
North—to make wise laws and come to just decisions in the conduct of my
business—laws and decisions which work for my own good in the first
instance—for theirs in the second; but I will neither be forced to give
my reasons, nor flinch from what I have once declared to be my
resolution. Let them turn out! I shall suffer as well as they: but in
the end they will find I have not bated nor altered one jot.”

Margaret had re-entered the room and was sitting at her work; but she
did not speak. Mr. Hale answered—

“I dare say I am talking in great ignorance; but from the little I know,
I should say that the masses were already passing rapidly into the
troublesome stage which intervenes between childhood and manhood, in the
life of the multitude as well as that of the individual. Now, the error
which many parents commit in the treatment of the individual at this
time is, insisting on the same unreasoning obedience as when all he had
to do in the way of duty was, to obey the simple laws of ‘Come when
you’re called,’ and ‘Do as you’re bid!’ But a wise parent humours the
desire for independent action, so as to become the friend and adviser
when his absolute rule shall cease. If I get wrong in my reasoning,
recollect, it is you who adopted the analogy.”

“Very lately,” said Margaret, “I heard a story of what happened in
Nuremberg only three or four years ago. A rich man there lived alone in
one of the immense mansions which were formerly both dwellings and
warehouses. It was reported that he had a child, but no one knew of it
for certain. For forty years this rumour kept rising and falling—never
utterly dying away. After his death it was found to be true. He had a
son—an overgrown man, with the unexercised intellect of a child, whom
he had kept up in that strange way, in order to save him from temptation
and error. But, of course, when this great old child was turned loose in
the world, every bad counsellor had power over him. He did not know good
from evil. His father had made the blunder of bringing him up in
ignorance and taking it for innocence; and after fourteen months of
riotous living, the city authorities had to take charge of him, in order
to save him from starvation. He could not even use words effectively
enough to be a successful beggar.”

“I used the comparison (suggested by Miss Hale) of the position of the
master to that of a parent, so I ought not to complain of your turning
the simile into a weapon against me. But, Mr. Hale, when you were
setting up a wise parent as a model for us, you said he humoured his
children in their desire for independent action. Now certainly, the time
is not come for the hands to have any independent action during business
hours; I hardly know what you would mean by it then. And I say, that the
masters would be trenching on the independence of their hands, in a way
that I, for one, should not feel justified in doing, if we interfered
too much with the life they lead out of the mills. Because they labour
ten hours a-day for us, I do not see that we have any right to impose
leading-strings upon them for the rest of their time. I value my own
independence so highly that I can fancy no degradation greater than that
of having another man perpetually directing and advising and lecturing
me, or even planning too closely in any way about my actions. He might
be the wisest of men or the most powerful—I should equally rebel and
resent his interference. I imagine this is a stronger feeling in the
North of England than in the South.”

“I beg your pardon, but is not that because there has been none of the
equality of friendship between the adviser and advised classes? Because
every man has had to stand in an unchristian and isolated position,
apart from and jealous of his brother-man: constantly afraid of his
rights being trenched upon?”

“I only state the fact. I am sorry to say, I have an appointment at
eight o’clock, and I must just take facts as I find them to-night,
without trying to account for them; which, indeed, would make no
difference in determining how to act as things stand—the facts must be
granted.”

“But,” said Margaret in a low voice, “it seems to me that it makes all
the difference in the world—.” Her father made a sign to her to be
silent, and allow Mr. Thornton to finish what he had to say. He was
already standing up and preparing to go.

“You must grant me this one point. Given a strong feeling of
independence in every Darkshire man, have I any right to obtrude my
views, of the manner in which he shall act, upon another (hating it as
I should do most vehemently myself), merely because he has labour to
sell and I capital to buy?”

“Not in the least,” said Margaret, determined to say just this one
thing; “not in the least because of your labour and capital positions,
whatever they are, but because you are a man, dealing with a set of men
over whom you have, whether you reject the use of it or not, immense
power, just because your lives and your welfare are so constantly and
intimately interwoven. God has made us so that we must be mutually
dependent. We may ignore our own dependence, or refuse to acknowledge
that others depend upon us in more respects than the payment of weekly
wages; but the thing must be, nevertheless. Neither you nor any other
master can help yourselves. The most proudly independent man depends on
those around him for their insensible influence on his character—his
life. And the most isolated of all your Darkshire Egos has dependants
clinging to him on all sides; he cannot shake them off, any more than
the great rock he resembles can shake off—”

“Pray don’t go into similes, Margaret; you have led us off once
already,” said her father, smiling, yet uneasy at the thought that they
were detaining Mr. Thornton against his will, which was a mistake; for
he rather liked it, as long as Margaret would talk, although what she
said only irritated him.

“Just tell me, Miss Hale, are you yourself ever influenced—no, that is
not a fair way of putting it;—but if you are ever conscious of being
influenced by others, and not by circumstances, have those others been
working directly or indirectly? Have they been labouring to exhort, to
enjoin, to act rightly for the sake of example, or have they been
simple, true men, taking up their duty, and doing it unflinchingly,
without a thought of how their actions were to make this man
industrious, that man saving? Why, if I were a workman, I should be
twenty times more impressed by the knowledge that my master was honest,
punctual, quick, resolute in all his doings (and hands are keener spies
even than valets), than by any amount of interference, however kindly
meant, with my ways of going on out of work-hours. I do not choose to
think too closely on what I am myself; but, I believe, I rely on the
straightforward honesty of my hands, and the open nature of their
opposition, in contra-distinction to the way in which the turn-out will
be managed in some mills, just because they know I scorn to take a
single dishonourable advantage, or do an underhand thing myself. It goes
farther than a whole course of lectures on ‘Honesty is the Best
Policy’—life diluted into words. No, no! What the master is, that will
the men be, without over-much taking thought on his part.”

“That is a great admission,” said Margaret, laughing. “When I see men
violent and obstinate, in pursuit of their rights, I may safely infer
that the master is the same; that he is a little ignorant of that spirit
which suffereth long, and is kind, and seeketh not her own.”

“You are just like all strangers who don’t understand the working of our
system, Miss Hale,” said he, hastily. “You suppose that our men are
puppets of dough, ready to be moulded into any amiable form we please.
You forget we have only to do with them for less than a third of their
lives; and you seem not to perceive that the duties of a manufacturer
are far larger and wider than those merely of an employer of labour: we
have a wide commercial character to maintain, which makes us into the
great pioneers of civilisation.”

“It strikes me,” said Mr. Hale, smiling, “that you might pioneer a
little at home. They are a rough, heathenish set of fellows, these
Milton men of yours.”

“They are that,” replied Mr. Thornton. “Rose-water surgery won’t do for
them. Cromwell would have made a capital mill-owner, Miss Hale. I wish
we had him to put down this strike for us.”

“Cromwell is no hero of mine,” she said, coldly. “But I am trying to
reconcile your admiration of despotism with your respect for other men’s
independence of character.”

He reddened at her tone. “I choose to be the unquestioned and
irresponsible master of my hands, during the hours they labour for me.
But those hours past, our relation ceases; and then comes in the same
respect for their independence that I myself exact.”

He did not speak again for a minute, he was too much vexed. But he shook
it off, and bade Mr. and Mrs. Hale good night. Then, drawing near to
Margaret, he said in a lower voice—

“I spoke hastily to you once this evening, and I am afraid, rather
rudely. But you know I am but an uncouth Milton manufacturer; will you
forgive me?”

“Certainly,” said she, smiling up in his face, the expression of which
was somewhat anxious and oppressed, and hardly cleared away as he met
her sweet sunny countenance, out of which all the north-wind effect of
their discussion had entirely vanished. But she did not put out her hand
to him, and again he felt the omission, and set it down to pride.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE SHADOW OF DEATH.

    “Trust in that veiled hand, which leads
    None by the path that he would go;
    And always be for change prepared,
    For the world’s law is ebb and flow.”
              FROM THE ARABIC.


The next afternoon Dr. Donaldson came to pay his first visit to Mrs.
Hale. The mystery that Margaret hoped their late habits of intimacy had
broken through was resumed. She was excluded from the room, while Dixon
was admitted. Margaret was not a ready lover, but where she loved she
loved passionately, and with no small degree of jealousy.

She went into her mother’s bed-room, just behind the drawing-room, and
paced it up and down, while awaiting the doctor’s coming out. Every now
and then she stopped to listen; she fancied she heard a moan. She
clenched her hands tight, and held her breath. She was sure she heard a
moan. Then all was still for a few minutes more; and then there was the
moving of chairs, the raised voices, all the little disturbances of
leave-taking.

When she heard the door open, she went quickly out of the bedroom.

“My father is from home, Dr. Donaldson; he has to attend a pupil at this
hour. May I trouble you to come into his room downstairs?”

She saw, and triumphed over all the obstacles which Dixon threw in her
way; assuming her rightful position as daughter of the house in
something of the spirit of the Elder Brother, which quelled the old
servant’s officiousness very effectually. Margaret’s conscious
assumption of this unusual dignity of demeanour towards Dixon, gave her
an instant’s amusement in the midst of her anxiety. She knew, from the
surprised expression on Dixon’s face, how ridiculously grand she herself
must be looking; and the idea carried her downstairs into the room; it
gave her that length of oblivion from the keen sharpness of the
recollection of the actual business in hand. Now, that came back, and
seemed to take away her breath. It was a moment or two before she could
utter a word.

But she spoke with an air of command, as she asked—

“What is the matter with mamma? You will oblige me by telling the simple
truth.” Then, seeing a slight hesitation on the doctor’s part, she
added—

“I am the only child she has—here, I mean. My father is not
sufficiently alarmed, I fear: and, therefore, if there is any serious
apprehension, it must be broken to him gently. I can do this. I can
nurse my mother. Pray, speak, sir; to see your face, and not be able to
read it, gives me a worse dread than I trust any words of yours will
justify.”

“My dear young lady, your mother seems to have a most attentive and
efficient servant, who is more like her friend——”

“I am her daughter, sir.”

“But when I tell you she expressly desired that you might not be
told——”

“I am not good or patient enough to submit to the prohibition. Besides,
I am sure, you are too wise—too experienced to have promised to keep
the secret.”

“Well,” said he, half-smiling, though sadly enough, “there you are
right. I did not promise. In fact, I fear, the secret will be known soon
enough without my revealing it.”

He paused. Margaret then went very white, and compressed her lips a
little more. Otherwise not a feature moved. With the quick insight into
character, without which no medical man can rise to the eminence of Dr.
Donaldson, he saw that she would exact the full truth; that she would
know if one iota was withheld; and that the withholding would be torture
more acute than the knowledge of it. He spoke two short sentences in a
low voice, watching her all the time; for the pupils of her eyes dilated
into a black horror, and the whiteness of her complexion became livid.
He ceased speaking. He waited for that look to go off,—for her gasping
breath to come. Then she said:—

“I thank you most truly, sir, for your confidence. That dread has
haunted me for many weeks. It is a true, real agony. My poor, poor
mother!” Her lips now began to quiver, and he let her have the relief of
tears, sure of her power of self-control to check them.

A few tears—those were all she shed, before she recollected the many
questions she longed to ask.

“Will there be much suffering?”

He shook his head. “That we cannot tell. It depends on constitution; on
a thousand things. But the late discoveries of medical science have
given us large power of alleviation.”

“My father!” said Margaret, trembling all over.

“I do not know Mr. Hale. I mean, it is difficult to give advice. But I
should say, bear on, with the knowledge you have forced me to give you
so abruptly, till the fact which I could not withhold has become in some
degree familiar to you, so that you may without too great an effort, be
able to give what comfort you can to your father. Before then,—my
visits, which of course, I shall repeat from time to time, although I
fear I can do nothing but alleviate,—a thousand little circumstances
will have occurred to awaken his alarm, to deepen it—so that he will be
all the better prepared.—Nay, my dear young lady—nay, my dear—I saw
Mr. Thornton, and I honour your father for the sacrifice he has made,
however mistaken I may believe him to be.—Well, this once, if it will
please you, my dear. Only remember, when I come again, I come as a
friend. And you must learn to look upon me as such, because seeing each
other—getting to know each other at such times as these, is worth years
of morning calls.”

Margaret could not speak for crying; but she wrang his hand at parting.

“That’s what I call a fine girl!” thought Dr. Donaldson, when he was
seated in his carriage, and had time to examine his ringed hand, which
had slightly suffered from her pressure. “Who would have thought that
little hand could have given such a squeeze? But the bones were well put
together, and that gives immense power. What a queen she is! With her
head thrown back at first, to force me into speaking the truth; and then
bent so eagerly forward to listen. Poor thing! I must see she does not
overstrain herself. Though it’s astonishing how much these thorough-bred
creatures can do and suffer. That girl’s game to the back-bone. Another,
who had gone that deadly colour, could never have come round without
either fainting or hysterics. But she wouldn’t do either—not she! And
the very force of her will brought her round. Such a girl as that would
win my heart, if I were thirty years younger. It’s too late now. Ah;
here we are at the Archers’.” So out he jumped, with thought, wisdom,
experience, sympathy, and ready to attend to any of the calls made upon
them by this family, just as if there were none other in the world.

Meanwhile, Margaret had returned into her father’s study for a moment,
to recover strength before going upstairs into her mother’s presence.

“Oh, my God, my God! but this is terrible. How shall I bear it? Such a
deadly disease! no hope! Oh, mamma, mamma, I wish I had never gone to
aunt Shaw’s, and been all those precious years away from you! Poor
mamma! how much she must have borne! Oh, pray thee, my God, that her
sufferings may not be too acute, too dreadful. How shall I bear to see
them? How can I bear papa’s agony? He must not be told yet; not all at
once. It would kill him. But I won’t lose another moment of my own dear,
precious mother.”

She ran upstairs. Dixon was not in the room. Mrs. Hale lay back in an
easy chair, with a soft white shawl wrapped around her, and a becoming
cap put on, in expectation of the doctor’s visit. Her face had a little
faint colour in it, and the very exhaustion after the examination gave
it a peaceful look. Margaret was surprised to see her look so calm.

“Why, Margaret, how strange you look! What is the matter?” And then, as
the idea stole into her mind of what was indeed the real state of the
case, she added, as if a little displeased: “you have not been seeing
Dr. Donaldson, and asking him any questions—have you child?” Margaret
did not reply—only looked wistfully towards her. Mrs. Hale became more
displeased. “He would not surely break his word to me, and”—

“Oh yes, mamma, he did. I made him. It was I—blame me.” She knelt down
by her mother’s side, and caught her hand—she would not let it go,
though Mrs. Hale tried to pull it away. She kept kissing it, and the hot
tears she shed bathed it.

“Margaret, it was very wrong of you. You knew I did not wish you to
know.” But, as if tired with the contest, she left her hand in
Margaret’s clasp, and by-and-by she returned the pressure faintly. That
encouraged Margaret to speak.

“Oh, mamma! let me be your nurse. I will learn anything Dixon can teach
me. But you know I am your child, and I do think I have a right to do
everything for you.”

“You don’t know what you are asking,” said Mrs. Hale, with a shudder.

“Yes, I do. I know a great deal more than you are aware of. Let me be
your nurse. Let me try, at any rate. No one has ever, shall ever try so
hard as I will do. It will be such a comfort, mamma.”

“My poor child! Well, you shall try. Do you know, Margaret, Dixon and I
thought you would quite shrink from me if you knew—”

“Dixon thought!” said Margaret, her lip curling. “Dixon could not give
me credit for enough true love—for as much as herself! She thought, I
suppose, that I was one of those poor sickly women who like to lie on
rose leaves, and be fanned all day. Don’t let Dixon’s fancies come any
more between you and me, mamma. Don’t please!” implored she.

“Don’t be angry with Dixon,” said Mrs. Hale, anxiously. Margaret
recovered herself.

“No! I won’t. I will try and be humble, and learn her ways, if you will
only let me do all I can for you. Let me be in the first place,
mother—I am greedy of that. I used to fancy you would forget me while I
was away at aunt Shaw’s, and cry myself to sleep at nights with that
notion in my head.”

“And I used to think, how will Margaret bear our make-shift poverty
after the thorough comfort and luxury in Harley Street, till I have many
a time been more ashamed of your seeing our contrivances at Helstone
than of any stranger finding them out.”

“Oh, mamma! and I did so enjoy them. They were so much more amusing than
all the jog-trot Harley Street ways. The wardrobe shelf with handles
that served as a supper-tray on grand occasions! And the old tea-chests
stuffed and covered for ottomans! I think what you call the make-shift
contrivances at dear Helstone were a charming part of the life there.”

“I shall never see Helstone again, Margaret,” said Mrs. Hale, the tears
welling up into her eyes. Margaret could not reply. Mrs. Hale went on.
“While I was there, I was for ever wanting to leave it. Every place
seemed pleasanter. And now I shall die far away from it. I am rightly
punished.”

“You must not talk so,” said Margaret impatiently. “He said you might
live for years. Oh, mother! we will have you back at Helstone yet.”

“No, never! That I must take as a just penance. But,
Margaret—Frederick!”

At the mention of that one word, she suddenly cried out loud, as in some
sharp agony. It seemed as if the thought of him upset all her composure,
destroyed the calm, overcame the exhaustion. Wild passionate cry
succeeded to cry—“Frederick! Frederick! Come to me. I am dying. Little
first-born child, come to me once again!”

She was in violent hysterics. Margaret went and called Dixon in terror.
Dixon came in a huff, and accused Margaret of having over-excited her
mother. Margaret bore all meekly, only trusting that her father might
not return. In spite of her alarm, which was even greater than the
occasion warranted, she obeyed all Dixon’s directions promptly and well
without a word of self-justification. By so doing she mollified her
accuser. They put her mother to bed, and Margaret sate by her till she
fell asleep, and afterwards till Dixon beckoned her out of the room,
and, with a sour face, as if doing something against the grain, she bade
her drink a cup of coffee which she had prepared for her in the
drawing-room, and stood over her in a commanding attitude as she did so.

“You shouldn’t have been so curious, Miss, and then you wouldn’t have
needed to fret before your time. It would have come soon enough. And
now, I suppose, you’ll tell master, and a pretty household I shall have
of you!”

“No, Dixon,” said Margaret, sorrowfully, “I will not tell papa. He could
not bear it as I can.” And by way of proving how well she bore it, she
burst into tears.

“Ay! I knew how it would be. Now you’ll waken your mamma, just after
she’s gone to sleep so quietly. Miss Margaret my dear, I’ve had to keep
it down this many a week: and though I don’t pretend I can love her as
you do, yet I loved her better than any other man, woman, or child—no
one but Master Frederick ever came near her in my mind. Ever since Lady
Beresford’s maid first took me in to see her dressed out in white crape,
and corn-ears, and scarlet poppies, and I ran a needle down into my
finger, and broke it in, and she tore up her worked pocket-handkerchief,
after they’d cut it out, and came in to wet the bandages again with
lotion when she returned from the ball—where she’d been the prettiest
young lady of all—I’ve never loved any one like her. I little thought
then that I should live to see her brought so low. I don’t mean no
reproach to nobody. Many a one calls you pretty and handsome, and what
not. Even in this smoky place, enough to blind one’s eyes, the owls can
see that. But you’ll never be like your mother for beauty—never; not if
you live to be a hundred.”

“Mamma is very pretty still. Poor mamma!”

“Now don’t ye set off again, or I shall give way at last” (whimpering).
“You’ll never stand master’s coming home, and questioning, at this rate.
Go out and take a walk, and come in something like. Many’s the time I’ve
longed to walk it off—the thought of what was the matter with her, and
how it must all end.”

“Oh, Dixon!” said Margaret, “how often I’ve been cross with you, not
knowing what a terrible secret you had to bear!”

“Bless you, child! I like to see you showing a bit of a spirit. It’s the
good old Beresford blood. Why, the last Sir John but two shot his
steward down, there where he stood, for just telling him that he racked
the tenants, and he’d racked the tenants till he could get no more money
off them than he could get skin off a flint.”

“Well, Dixon, I won’t shoot you, and I’ll try not to be cross again.”

“You never have. If I’ve said it at times, it has always been to myself,
just in private, by way of making a little agreeable conversation, for
there’s no one here fit to talk to. And when you fire up you’re the very
image of Master Frederick. I could find in my heart to put you in a
passion any day just to see his stormy look coming like a great cloud
over your face. But now you go out, Miss. I’ll watch over Missus; and as
for master, his books are company enough for him, if he should come in.”

“I will go,” said Margaret. She hung about Dixon for a minute or so, as
if afraid and irresolute; then, suddenly kissing her, she went quickly
out of the room.

“Bless her!” said Dixon. “She’s as sweet as a nut. There are three
people I love; its Missus, Master Frederick, and her. Just them three.
That’s all. The rest be hanged, for I don’t know what they’re in the
world for. Master was born, I suppose, for to marry missus. If I thought
he loved her properly, I might get to love him in time. But he should
ha’ made a deal more on her, and not been always reading, reading,
thinking, thinking. See what it has brought him to. Many a one who never
reads or thinks either, gets to be Rector, and Dean, and what not; and I
daresay master might, if he’d just minded missus, and let the weary
reading and thinking alone.—There she goes” (looking out of the window
as she heard the front door shut). “Poor young lady! her clothes look
shabby to what they did when she came to Helstone a year ago. Then she
hadn’t so much as a darned stocking or a cleaned pair of gloves in all
her wardrobe. And now—!”




CHAPTER XVII.

WHAT IS A STRIKE?

    “There are briars besetting every path,
      Which call for patient care;
    There is a cross in every lot,
      And an earnest need for prayer.”
              ANON.


Margaret went out heavily and unwillingly enough. But the length of a
street—yes, the air of a Milton Street—cheered her young blood before
she reached her first turning. Her step grew lighter, her lip redder.
She began to take notice, instead of having her thoughts turned so
exclusively inward. She saw unusual loiterers in the streets: men with
their hands in their pockets sauntering along; loud-laughing and
loud-spoken girls clustered together, apparently excited to high
spirits, and a boisterous independence of temper and behaviour. The more
ill-looking of the men—the discreditable minority—hung about on the
steps of the beer-houses and gin-shops, smoking, and commenting pretty
freely on every passer-by. Margaret disliked the prospect of the long
walk through these streets, before she came to the fields which she had
planned to reach. Instead, she would go and see Bessy Higgins. It would
not be so refreshing as a quiet country walk, but still it would perhaps
be doing the kinder thing.

Nicholas Higgins was sitting by the fire smoking, as she went in. Bessy
was rocking herself on the other side.

Nicholas took the pipe out of his mouth, and standing up, pushed his
chair towards Margaret; he leant against the chimney-piece in a lounging
attitude, while she asked Bessy how she was.

“Hoo’s rather down i’ th’ mouth in regard to spirits, but hoo’s better
in health. Hoo doesn’t like this strike. Hoo’s a deal too much set on
piece and quietness at any price.”

“This is th’ third strike I’ve seen,” said she, sighing, as if that was
answer and explanation enough.

“Well, third time pays for all. See if we don’t dang th’ masters this
time. See if they don’t come and beg us to come back at our own price.
That’s all. We’ve missed it afore time, I grant yo’; but this time we’n
laid our plans desperate deep.”

“Why do you strike?” asked Margaret. “Striking is leaving off work till
you get your own rate of wages, is it not? You must not wonder at my
ignorance; where I come from I never heard of a strike.”

“I wish I were there,” said Bessie, wearily. “But it’s not for me to get
sick and tired o’ strikes. This is the last I’ll see. Before it’s ended
I shall be in the Great City—the Holy Jerusalem.”

“Hoo’s so full of th’ life to come, hoo cannot think of th’ present. Now
I, yo see, am bound to do the best I can here. I think a bird i’ th’
hand is worth two i’ th’ bush. So them’s the different views we take on
th’ strike question.”

“But,” said Margaret, “if the people struck, as you call it, where I
come from, as they are mostly all field labourers, the seed would not be
sown, the hay got in, the corn reaped.”

“Well?” said he. He had resumed his pipe, and put his “well” in the form
of an interrogation.

“Why,” she went on, “what would become of the farmers?”

He puffed away. “I reckon, they’d have either to give up their farms, or
to give fair rate of wage.”

“Suppose they could not, or would not do the last; they could not give
up their farms all in a minute, however much they might wish to do so;
but they would have no hay, nor corn to sell that year; and where would
the money come from to pay the labourers’ wages the next?”

Still puffing away. At last he said:

“I know nought of your ways down South. I have heerd they’re a pack of
spiritless, down-trodden men; welly clemmed to death; too dazed wi’
clemming to know when they’re put upon. Now, it’s not so here. We known
when we’re put upon; and we’en too much blood in us to stand it. We just
take our hands fro’ our looms, and say, ‘Yo’ may clem us, but yo’ll not
put upon us, my masters!’ And be danged to ’em, they shan’t this time!”

“I wished I lived down South,” said Bessy.

“There’s a deal to bear there,” said Margaret. “There are sorrows to
bear everywhere. There is very hard bodily labour to be gone through,
with very little food to give strength.”

“But it’s out of doors,” said Bessy. “And away from the endless, endless
noise, and sickening heat.”

“It’s sometimes in heavy rain, and sometimes in bitter cold. A young
person can stand it; but an old man gets racked with rheumatism, and
bent and withered before his time; yet he must just work on the same, or
else go to the workhouse.”

“I thought yo were so taken wi’ the ways of the South country.”

“So I am,” said Margaret, smiling a little, as she found herself thus
caught. “I only mean, Bessy, there’s good and bad in everything in this
world; and as you felt the bad up here, I thought it was but fair you
should know the bad down there.”

“And yo say they never strike down there?” asked Nicholas abruptly.

“No!” said Margaret; “I think they have too much sense.”

“An’ I think,” replied he, dashing the ashes out of his pipe with so
much vehemence that it broke, “it’s not that they’ve too much sense, but
that they’ve too little spirit.”

“Oh, father!” said Bessy, “what have ye gained by striking? Just think
of that first strike when mother died—how we all had to clem—you the
worst of all; and yet many a one went in every week at the same wage,
till all were gone in that there was work for; and some went beggars all
their lives at after.”

“Ay,” said he. “That there strike was badly managed. Folk got into th’
management of it, as were either fools or not true men. Yo’ll see, it’ll
be different this time.”

“But all this time you’ve not told me what you’re striking for,” said
Margaret, again.

“Why, yo see, there’s five or six masters who have set themselves again
paying the wages they’ve been paying these two years past, and
flourishing upon, and getting richer upon. And now they come to us, and
say we’re to take less. And we won’t. We’ll just clem them to death
first; and see who’ll work for ’em then. They’ll have killed the goose
that laid ’em the golden eggs, I reckon.”

“And so you plan dying, in order to be revenged upon them!”

“No,” said he, “I dunnot. I just look forward to the chance of dying at
my post sooner than yield. That’s what folk call fine and honourable in
a soldier, and why not in a poor weaver-chap?”

“But,” said Margaret, “a soldier dies in the cause of the Nation—in the
cause of others.”

He laughed grimly. “My lass,” said he, “yo’re but a young wench, but
don’t yo think I can keep three people—that’s Bessy, and Mary, and
me—on sixteen shillings a week? Dun yo think it’s for mysel’ I’m
striking work at this time? It is just as much in the cause of others as
yon soldier—only m’appen, the cause he dies for is just that of
somebody he never clapt eyes on, nor heerd on all his born days, while I
take up John Boucher’s cause, as lives next door but one, wi’ a sickly
wife, and eight childer, none on ’em factory age; and I don’t take up
his cause only, though he’s a poor good-for-nought, as can only manage
two looms at a time, but I take up th’ cause o’ justice. Why are we to
have less wage now, I ask, than two year ago?”

“Don’t ask me,” said Margaret; “I am very ignorant. Ask some of your
masters. Surely they will give you a reason for it. It is not merely an
arbitrary decision of theirs, come to without reason.”

“Yo’re just a foreigner, and nothing more,” said he, contemptuously.
“Much yo know about it. Ask th’ masters! They’d tell us to mind our own
business, and they’d mind theirs. Our business being, yo understand, to
take the bated wage, and be thankful; and their business to bate us down
to clemming point, to swell their profits. That’s what it is.”

“But,” said Margaret, determined not to give way, although she saw she
was irritating him, “the state of trade may be such as not to enable
them to give you the same remuneration.”

“State o’ trade! That’s just a piece o’ masters’ humbug. It’s rate o’
wages I was talking of. Th’ masters keep th’ state o’ trade in their own
hands; and just walk it forward like a black bug-a-boo, to frighten
naughty children with into being good. I’ll tell you it’s their
part,—their cue, as some folks call it,—to beat us down, to swell
their fortunes; and it’s ours to stand up and fight hard,—not for
ourselves alone, but for them round about us—for justice and fair play.
We help to make their profits, and we ought to help spend ’em. It’s not
that we want their brass so much this time, as we’ve done many a time
afore. We’n getten money laid by; and we’re resolved to stand and fall
together; not a man on us will go in for less wage than th’ Union says
is our due. So I say, ‘hooray for the strike,’ and let Thornton, and
Slickson, and Hamper, and their set look to it!”

“Thornton!” said Margaret. “Mr. Thornton of Marlborough Street?”

“Aye! Thornton o’ Marlborough Mill, as we call him.”

“He is one of the masters you are striving with, is he not? What sort of
a master is he?”

“Did yo’ ever see a bulldog? Set a bulldog on hind legs, and dress him
up in coat and breeches, and yo’n just getten John Thornton.”

“Nay,” said Margaret, laughing, “I deny that. Mr. Thornton is plain
enough, but he’s not like a bulldog, with its short broad nose, and
snarling upper lip.”

“No! not in look, I grant yo. But let John Thornton get hold on a
notion, and he’ll stick to it like a bulldog; yo might pull him away wi’
a pitchfork ere he’d leave go. He’s worth fighting wi’, is John
Thornton. As for Slickson, I take it, some o’ these days he’ll wheedle
his men back wi’ fair promises; that they’ll just get cheated out of as
soon as they’re in his power again. He’ll work his fines well out on
’em, I’ll warrant. He’s as slippery as an eel, he is. He’s like a
cat,—as sleek, and cunning, and fierce. It’ll never be an honest up and
down fight wi’ him, as it will be wi’ Thornton. Thornton’s as dour as a
door-nail; an obstinate chap, every inch on him,—th’ oud bulldog!”

“Poor Bessy!” said Margaret, turning round to her. “You sigh over it
all. You don’t like struggling and fighting as your father does, do
you?”

“No!” said she, heavily. “I’m sick on it. I could have wished to have
had other talk about me in my latter days, than just the clashing and
clanging and clattering that has ever wearied a’ my life long, about
work and wages, and masters, and hands, and knobsticks.”

“Poor wench! latter days be farred! Thou’rt looking a sight better
already for a little stir and change. Beside, I shall be a deal here to
make it more lively for thee.”

“Tobacco-smoke chokes me!” said she, querulously.

“Then I’ll never smoke no more i’ the house!” he replied, tenderly. “But
why didst thou not tell me afore, thou foolish wench?”

She did not speak for a while, and then so low that only Margaret heard
her:

“I reckon, he’ll want a’ the comfort he can get out o’ either pipe or
drink afore he’s done.”

Her father went out of doors, evidently to finish his pipe.

Bessy said passionately,

“Now am not I a fool,—am I not, Miss?—there, I knew I ought for to
keep father at home, and away fro’ the folk that are always ready for to
tempt a man, in time o’ strike, to go drink,—and there my tongue must
needs quarrel with this pipe o’ his’n—and he’ll go off, I know he
will,—as often as he wants to smoke—and nobody knows where it’ll end.
I wish I’d letten myself be choked first.”

“But does your father drink?” said Margaret.

“No—not to say drink,” replied she, still in the same wild excited
tone. “But what win ye have? There are days wi’ you as wi’ other folk, I
suppose, when yo’ get up and go through th’ hours, just longing for a
bit of a change—a bit of a fillip, as it were. I know I ha’ gone and
bought a four-pounder out o’ another baker’s shop to common on such
days, just because I sickened at the thought of going on for ever wi’
the same sight in my eyes, and the same sound in my ears, and the same
taste i’ my mouth, and the same thought (or no thought, for that matter)
in my head, day after day, for ever. I’ve longed for to be a man to go
spreeing, even if it were only a tramp to some new place in search o’
work. And father—all men—have it stronger in ’em than me to get tired
o’ sameness and work for ever. And what is ’em to do? It’s little blame
to them if they do go into th’ gin-shop for to make their blood flow
quicker, and more lively, and see things they never see at no other
time—pictures, and looking-glass, and such like. But father never was a
drunkard, though maybe, he’s got worse for drink, now and then. Only yo’
see,” and now her voice took a mournful, pleading tone, “at times o’
strike there’s much to knock a man down, for all they start so
hopefully; and where’s the comfort to come fro’? He’ll get angry and
mad—they all do—and then they get tired out wi’ being angry and mad,
and maybe ha’ done things in their passion they’d be glad to forget.
Bless yo’r sweet pitiful face! but yo’ dunnot know what a strike is
yet.”

“Come, Bessy,” said Margaret, “I won’t say you’re exaggerating, because
I don’t know enough about it: but, perhaps, as you’re not well, you’re
only looking on one side, and there is another and a brighter to be
looked to.”

“It’s all well enough for yo’ to say so, who have lived in pleasant
green places all your life long, and never known want or care, or
wickedness either, for that matter.”

“Take care,” said Margaret, her cheek flushing, and her eye lightening,
“how you judge, Bessy. I shall go home to my mother, who is so ill—so
ill, Bessy, that there’s no outlet but death for her out of prison of
her great suffering; and yet I must speak cheerfully to my father, who
has no notion of her real state, and to whom the knowledge must come
gradually. The only person—the only one who could sympathise with me
and help me—whose presence could comfort my mother more than any other
earthly thing—is falsely accused—would run the risk of death if he
came to see his dying mother. This I tell you—only you, Bessy. You must
not mention it. No other person in Milton—hardly any other person in
England knows. Have I not care? Do I not know anxiety, though I go about
well-dressed, and have food enough? Oh, Bessy, God is just, and our lots
are well portioned out by Him, although none but He knows the bitterness
of our souls.”

“I ask your pardon,” replied Bessy, humbly. “Sometimes, when I’ve
thought o’ my life, and the little pleasure I’ve had in it, I’ve
believed that, maybe, I was one of those doomed to die by the falling of
a star from heaven; ‘And the name of the star is called Wormwood; and
the third part of the waters became wormwood; and men died of the
waters, because they were made bitter.’ One can bear pain and sorrow
better if one thinks it has been prophesied long before for one:
somehow, then it seems as if my pain was needed for the fulfilment;
otherways it seems all sent for nothing.”

“Nay, Bessy—think!” said Margaret. “God does not willingly inflict.
Don’t dwell so much on the prophecies, but read the clearer parts of the
Bible.”

“I dare say it would be wiser; but where would I hear such grand words
of promise—hear tell o’ anything so far different fro’ this dreary
world, and this town above a’ as in Revelations? Many’s the time I’ve
repeated the verses in the seventh chapter to myself, just for the
sound. It’s as good as an organ, and as different from every day, too.
No, I cannot give up Revelations. It gives me more comfort than any
other book i’ the Bible.”

“Let me come and read you some of my favourite chapters.”

“Ay,” said she greedily, “come. Father will maybe hear yo.’ He’s deaved
wi’ my talking; he says it’s all nought to do with the things o’ to-day,
and that’s his business.”

“Where is your sister?”

“Gone fustian cutting. I were loth to let her go; but somehow we must
live; and th’ Union can’t afford us much.”

“Now I must go. You have done me good, Bessy.”

“I done you good!”

“Yes, I came here very sad, and rather too apt to think my own cause for
grief was the only one in the world. And now I hear how you have had to
bear for years, and that makes me stronger.”

“Bless yo’! I thought a’ the good-doing was on the side of gentlefolk. I
shall get proud if I think I can do good to yo’.”

“You won’t do it if you think about it. But you’ll only puzzle yourself
if you do, that’s one comfort.”

“You’re not like no one I ever seed. I dunno what to make of yo’.”

“Nor I of myself. Good-bye!”

Bessy stilled her rocking to gaze after her.

“I wonder if there are many folk like her down South. She’s like a
breath of country air, somehow. She freshens me up above a bit. Who’d a
thought that face—as bright and as strong as the angel I dream
of—could have known the sorrow she speaks on? I wonder how she’ll sin.
All on us must sin. I think a deal on her, for sure. But father does the
like, I see. And Mary even. It’s not often hoo’s stirred up to notice
much.”




CHAPTER XVIII.

LIKES AND DISLIKES.

    “My heart revolts within me, and two voices
    Make themselves audible within my bosom.”
              WALLENSTEIN.


On Margaret’s return home she found two letters on the table: one was a
note for her mother,—the other, which had come by the post, was
evidently from her aunt Shaw—covered with foreign post-marks—thin,
silvery, and rustling. She took up the other, and was examining it, when
her father came in suddenly:

“So your mother is tired, and gone to bed early! I’m afraid, such a
thundery day was not the best in the world for the doctor to see her.
What did he say? Dixon tells me he spoke to you about her.”

Margaret hesitated. Her father’s looks became more grave and anxious:

“He does not think her seriously ill?”

“Not at present; she needs care, he says; he was very kind, and he said
he would call again, and see how his medicines worked.”

“Only care?—he did not recommend change of air?—he did not say this
smoky town was doing her any harm, did he, Margaret?”

“No! not a word,” she replied, gravely. “He was anxious, I think.”

“Doctors have that anxious manner; it’s professional,” said he.

Margaret saw, in her father’s nervous ways, that the first impression of
possible danger was made upon his mind, in spite of all his making light
of what she told him. He could not forget the subject,—could not pass
from it to other things; he kept recurring to it through the evening,
with an unwillingness to receive even the slightest unfavourable idea,
which made Margaret inexpressibly sad.

“This letter is from Aunt Shaw, papa. She has got to Naples, and finds
it too hot, so she has taken apartments at Sorrento. But I don’t think
she likes Italy.”

“He did not say anything about diet, did he?”

“It was to be nourishing, and digestible. Mamma’s appetite is pretty
good, I think.”

“Yes! and that makes it all the more strange he should have thought of
speaking about diet.”

“I asked him, papa.” Another pause. Then Margaret went on: “Aunt Shaw
says she has sent me some coral ornaments, papa: but,” added Margaret,
half smiling, “she’s afraid the Milton dissenters won’t appreciate them.
She has got all her ideas of Dissenters from the Quakers, has she not?”

“If ever you hear or notice that your mother wishes for anything, be
sure you let me know. I am so afraid she does not tell me always what
she would like. Pray, see after that girl Mrs. Thornton named. If we had
a good, efficient house-servant, Dixon could be constantly with her, and
I’d answer for it we’d soon set her up amongst us, if care will do it.
She’s been very much tired of late, with the hot weather, and the
difficulty of getting a servant. A little rest will put her quite to
rights—eh, Margaret?”

“I hope so,” said Margaret,—but so sadly, that her father took notice
of it. He pinched her cheek.

“Come; if you look so pale as this, I must rouge you up a little. Take
care of yourself, child, or you’ll be wanting the doctor next.”

But he could not settle to anything that evening. He was continually
going backwards and forwards, on laborious tiptoe, to see if his wife
was still asleep. Margaret’s heart ached at his restlessness—his trying
to stifle and strangle the hideous fear that was looming out of the dark
places of his heart.

He came back at last, somewhat comforted.

“She’s awake now, Margaret. She quite smiled as she saw me standing by
her. Just her old smile. And she says she feels refreshed, and ready for
tea. Where’s the note for her? She want’s to see it. I’ll read it to her
while you make tea.”

The note proved to be a formal invitation from Mrs. Thornton, to Mr.,
Mrs., and Miss Hale to dinner, on the twenty-first instant. Margaret was
surprised to find an acceptance contemplated, after all she had learnt
of sad probabilities during the day. But so it was. The idea of her
husband’s and daughter’s going to this dinner had quite captivated Mrs.
Hale’s fancy, even before Margaret had heard the contents of the note.
It was an event to diversify the monotony of the invalid’s life; and she
clung to the idea of their going, with even fretful pertinacity, when
Margaret objected.

“Nay, Margaret: if she wishes it, I’m sure we’ll both go willingly. She
never would wish it unless she felt herself really stronger—really
better than we thought she was, eh, Margaret?” said Mr. Hale, anxiously,
as she prepared to write the note of acceptance, the next day.

“Eh! Margaret?” questioned he, with a nervous motion of his hands. It
seemed cruel to refuse him the comfort he craved for. And besides, his
passionate refusal to admit the existence of fear, almost inspired
Margaret herself with hope.

“I do think she is better since last night,” said she. “Her eyes look
brighter, and her complexion clearer.”

“God bless you,” said her father earnestly. “But is it true? Yesterday
was so sultry every one felt ill. It was a most unlucky day for Mr.
Donaldson to see her on.”

So he went away to his day’s duties, now increased by the preparation of
some lectures he had promised to deliver to the working people at a
neighbouring Lyceum. He had chosen Ecclesiastical Architecture as his
subject, rather more in accordance with his own taste and knowledge than
as falling in with the character of the place or the desire for
particular kinds of information among those to whom he was to lecture.
And the institution itself, being in debt, was only too glad to get a
gratis course from an educated and accomplished man like Mr. Hale, let
the subject be what it might.

“Well, mother,” asked Mr. Thornton that night, “who have accepted your
invitations for the twenty-first?”

“Fanny, where are the notes? The Slicksons accept, Collingbrooks accept,
Stephenses accept, Browns decline. Hales—father and daughter
come—mother too great an invalid—Macphersons come, and Mr. Horsfall,
and Mr. Young. I was thinking of asking the Porters, as the Browns can’t
come.”

“Very good. Do you know, I’m really afraid Mrs. Hale is very far from
well, from what Dr. Donaldson says.”

“It’s strange of them to accept a dinner-invitation if she’s very ill,”
said Fanny.

“I didn’t say very ill,” said her brother, rather sharply. “I only said
far from well. They may not know it either.” And then he suddenly
remembered that, from what Dr. Donaldson had told him, Margaret, at any
rate, must be aware of the exact state of the case.

“Very probably they are quite aware of what you said yesterday, John—of
the great advantage it would be to them—to Mr. Hale, I mean, to be
introduced to such people as the Stephenses and the Collingbrooks.”

“I’m sure that motive would not influence them. No! I think I understand
how it is.”

“John!” said Fanny, laughing in her little, weak, nervous way. “How you
profess to understand these Hales, and how you never will allow that we
can know anything about them. Are they really so very different to most
people one meets with?”

She did not mean to vex him; but if she had intended it, she could not
have done it more thoroughly. He chafed in silence, however, not
deigning to reply to her question.

“They do not seem to me out of the common way,” said Mrs. Thornton. “He
appears a worthy kind of man enough; rather too simple for trade—so
it’s perhaps as well he should have been a clergyman first, and now a
teacher. She’s a bit of a fine lady, with her invalidism; and as for the
girl—she’s the only one who puzzles me when I think about her,—which I
don’t often do. She seems to have a great notion of giving herself airs;
and I can’t make out why. I could almost fancy she thinks herself too
good for her company at times. And yet they’re not rich; from all I can
hear they never have been.”

“And she’s not accomplished, mamma. She can’t play.”

“Go on, Fanny. What else does she want to bring her up to your
standard?”

“Nay! John,” said his mother, “that speech of Fanny’s did no harm. I
myself heard Miss Hale say she could not play. If you would let us
alone, we could perhaps like her, and see her merits.”

“I’m sure I never could!” murmured Fanny, protected by her mother. Mr.
Thornton heard, but did not care to reply. He was walking up and down
the dining-room, wishing that his mother would order candles, and allow
him to set to work at either reading or writing, and so put a stop to
the conversation. But he never thought of interfering in any of the
small domestic regulations that Mrs. Thornton observed, in habitual
remembrance of her old economies.

“Mother,” said he, stopping, and bravely speaking out the truth, “I wish
you would like Miss Hale.”

“Why,” asked she, startled by his earnest, yet tender manner. “You’re
never thinking of marrying her?—a girl without a penny.”

“She would never have me,” said he, with a short laugh.

“No, I don’t think she would,” answered his mother. “She laughed in my
face, when I praised her for speaking out something Mr. Bell had said in
your favour. I liked the girl for doing so frankly, for it made me sure
she had no thought of you; and the next minute she vexed me so by
seeming to think—— Well, never mind! Only you’re right in saying she’s
too good an opinion of herself to think of you! The saucy jade! I should
like to know where she’d find a better!”

“Well, as I’m just as much convinced of the truth of what you have been
saying as you can be; and as I have no thought or expectation of ever
asking her to be my wife, you’ll believe me for the future that I’m
quite disinterested in speaking about her. I foresee trouble for that
girl—perhaps, want of motherly care—and I only wish you to be ready to
be a friend to her, in case she needs one. Now, Fanny,” said he, “I
trust you have delicacy enough to understand, that it is as great an
injury to Miss Hale as to me—in fact, she would think it a greater—to
suppose that I have any reason, more than I now give, for begging you
and my mother to show her every kindly attention.”

“I cannot forgive her her pride,” said his mother; “I will befriend her,
if there is need, for your asking, John. I would befriend Jezebel
herself if you asked me. But this girl, who turns up her nose at us
all—who turns up her nose at you——”

“Nay, mother; I have never yet put myself, and I mean never to put
myself, within reach of her contempt.”

“Contempt, indeed!”—(One of Mrs. Thornton’s expressive snorts.)—“Don’t
go on speaking of Miss Hale, John, if I’ve to be kind to her. When I’m
with her, I don’t know if I like or dislike her most; but when I think
of her, and hear you talk of her, I hate her. I can see she’s given
herself airs to you as well as if you’d told me out.”

“And if she has,” said he—and then he paused for a moment—then went
on: “I’m not a lad, to be cowed by a proud look from a woman, or to care
for her misunderstanding me and my position. I can laugh at it!”

“To be sure! and at her too, with her fine notions, and haughty tosses!”

“I only wonder why you talk so much about her, then,” said Fanny. “I’m
sure, I’m tired enough of the subject.”

“Well!” said her brother, with a shade of bitterness. “Suppose we find
some more agreeable subject. What do you say to a strike, by way of
something pleasant to talk about?”

“Have the hands actually turned out?” asked Mrs. Thornton, with vivid
interest.

“Hamper’s men are actually out. Mine are working out their week, through
fear of being prosecuted for breach of contract. I’d have had every one
of them up and punished for it, that left his work before his time was
out.”

“The law expenses would have been more than the hands themselves were
worth—a set of ungrateful naughts!” said his mother.

“To be sure. But I’d have shown them how to keep my word, and how I mean
them to keep their’s. They know me by this time. Slickson’s men are
off—pretty certain he won’t spend money in getting them punished. We’re
in for a turn-out, mother.”

“I hope there are not many orders in hand?”

“Of course there are. They know that well enough. But they don’t quite
understand all, though they think they do.”

“What do you mean, John?”

Candles had been brought, and Fanny had taken up her interminable piece
of worsted-work, over which she was yawning; throwing herself back in
her chair, from time to time to gaze at vacancy, and think of nothing at
her ease.

“Why,” said he, “the Americans are getting their yarns so into the
general market, that our only chance is producing them at a lower rate.
If we can’t, we may shut up shop at once, and hands and masters alike go
on tramp. Yet these fools go back to the prices paid three years
ago—nay, some of their leaders quote Dickinson’s price now—though they
know as well as we do that, what with fines pressed out of their wages,
as no honourable man would extort them, the real rate of wage paid at
Dickinson’s is less than at ours. Upon my word, mother, I wish the old
combination laws were in force. It is too bad to find out that
fools—ignorant, wayward men like these—just by uniting their silly
heads, are to rule over the fortunes of those who bring all the wisdom
that knowledge and experience, and often painful thought and anxiety,
can give. The next thing will be—indeed, we’ve all but come to it
now—that we shall have to go and ask—stand hat in hand—and humbly ask
the secretary of the Spinner’s Union to be so kind as to furnish us with
labour at their own price. That’s what they want—they, who haven’t the
sense to see that, if we don’t get a fair share of the profits to
compensate us for our wear and tear here in England, we can move off to
some other country; and that, what with home and foreign competition, we
are none of us likely to make above a fair share, and may be thankful
enough if we can get that, in an average number of years.”

“Can’t you get hands from Ireland? I wouldn’t keep these fellows a day.
I’d teach them that I was master, and could employ what servants I
liked.”

“Yes! to be sure, I can; and will, too, if they go on long. It will be
trouble and expense, and I fear there will be some danger; but I will do
it, rather than give in.”

“If there is to be all this extra expense, I’m sorry we’re giving a
dinner just now.”

“So am I,—not because of the expense, but because I shall have much to
think about, and many unexpected calls on my time. But we must have had
Mr. Horsfall, and he does not stay in Milton long. And as for the
others, we owe them dinners, and it’s all one trouble.”

He kept on with his restless walk—not speaking any more, but drawing a
deep breath from time to time, as if endeavouring to throw off some
annoying thought. Fanny asked her mother numerous small questions, all
having nothing to do with the subject, which a wiser person would have
perceived was occupying her attention. Consequently, she received many
short answers. She was not sorry when, at ten o’clock, the servants
filed in to prayers. These her mother always read,—first reading a
chapter. They were now working steadily through the Old Testament. When
prayers were ended, and his mother had wished him good-night, with that
long steady look of hers which conveyed no expression of the tenderness
that was in her heart, but yet had the intensity of a blessing, Mr.
Thornton continued his walk. All his business plans had received a
check, a sudden pull-up, from this approaching turn-out. The forethought
of many anxious hours was thrown away, utterly wasted by their insane
folly, which would injure themselves even more than him, though no one
could set any limit to the mischief they were doing. And these were the
men who thought themselves fitted to direct the masters in the disposal
of their capital; Hamper had said, only this very day, that if he were
ruined by the strike, he would start life again, comforted by the
conviction that those who had brought it on were in a worse predicament
than he himself,—for he had head as well as hands, while they had only
hands; and if they drove away their market, they could not follow it,
nor turn to anything else. But this thought was no consolation to Mr.
Thornton. It might be that revenge gave him no pleasure; it might be
that he valued the position he had earned with the sweat of his brow, so
much that he keenly felt its being endangered by the ignorance or folly
of others,—so keenly that he had no thoughts to spare for what would be
the consequences of their conduct to themselves. He paced up and down,
setting his teeth now and then. At last it struck two. The candles were
flickering in their sockets. He lighted his own, muttering to himself:

“Once for all they shall know whom they have got to deal with. I can
give them a fortnight,—no more. If they don’t see their madness before
the end of that time, I must have hands from Ireland. I believe it’s
Slickson’s doing,—confound him and his dodges! He thought he was
overstocked; so he seemed to yield at first, when the deputation came to
him,—and of course, he only confirmed them in their folly, as he meant
to do. That’s where it spread from.”




CHAPTER XIX.

ANGEL VISITS.

    “As angels in some brighter dreams
       Call to the soul when man doth sleep,
     So some strange thoughts transcend our wonted themes,
       And into glory peep.”
                                   HENRY VAUGHAN.


Mrs. Hale was curiously amused and interested by the idea of the
Thornton dinner party. She kept wondering about the details, with
something of the simplicity of a little child, who wants to have all its
anticipated pleasure described beforehand. But the monotonous life led
by invalids often makes them like children, inasmuch as they have
neither of them any sense of proportion in events, and seem each to
believe that the walls and curtains which shut in their world, and shut
out everything else, must of necessity be larger than anything hidden
beyond. Besides Mrs. Hale had had her vanities as a girl; had perhaps
unduly felt their mortification when she became a poor clergyman’s
wife;—they had been smothered and kept down; but they were not extinct;
and she liked to think of seeing Margaret dressed for a party, and
discussed what she should wear, with an unsettled anxiety that amused
Margaret, who had been more accustomed to society in her one year in
Harley Street than her mother in five and twenty years of Helstone.

“Then you think you shall wear your white silk. Are you sure it will
fit? It’s nearly a year since Edith was married!”

“Oh, yes, mamma! Mrs. Murray made it, and it’s sure to be right; it may
be a straw’s breadth shorter or longer-waisted, according to my having
grown fat or thin. But I don’t think I’ve altered in the least.”

“Hadn’t you better let Dixon see it? It may have gone yellow with lying
by.”

“If you like, mamma. But if the worst comes to the worst, I’ve a very
nice pink gauze which Aunt Shaw gave me, only two or three months before
Edith was married. That can’t have gone yellow.”

“No! but it may have faded.”

“Well! then I’ve a green silk. I feel more as if it was the
embarrassment of riches.”

“I wish I knew what you ought to wear,” said Mrs. Hale, nervously.

Margaret’s manner changed instantly. “Shall I go and put them on one
after another, mamma, and then you could see which you liked best?”

“But—yes! perhaps that will be best.”

So off Margaret went. She was very much inclined to play some pranks
when she was dressed up at such an unusual hour; to make her rich white
silk balloon out into a cheese, to retreat backwards from her mother as
if she were the queen; but when she found that these freaks of hers were
regarded as interruptions to the serious business, and as such annoyed
her mother, she became grave and sedate. What had possessed the world
(her world) to fidget so about her dress, she could not understand; but
that very afternoon, on naming her engagement to Bessy Higgins (apropos
of the servant that Mrs. Thornton had promised to enquire about), Bessy
quite roused up at the intelligence.

“Dear! and are you going to dine at Thornton’s at Marlborough Mills?”

“Yes, Bessy. Why are you so surprised?”

“Oh, I dunno. But they visit wi’ a’ th’ first folk in Milton.”

“And you don’t think we’re quite the first folk in Milton, eh, Bessy?”

Bessy’s cheeks flushed a little at her thought being thus easily read.

“Well,” said she, “yo’ see, they thinken a deal o’ money here; and I
reckon yo’ve not getten much.”

“No,” said Margaret, “that’s very true. But we are educated people, and
have lived amongst educated people. Is there anything so wonderful, in
our being asked out to dinner by a man who owns himself inferior to my
father by coming to him to be instructed? I don’t mean to blame Mr.
Thornton. Few drapers’ assistants, as he was once, could have made
themselves what he is.”

“But can yo’ give dinners back, in yo’re small house? Thornton’s house
is three times as big.”

“Well, I think we could manage to give Mr. Thornton a dinner back, as
you call it. Perhaps not in such a large room, nor with so many people.
But I don’t think we’ve thought about it at all in that way.”

“I never thought yo’d be dining with Thorntons,” repeated Bessy. “Why,
the mayor hissel’ dines there; and the members of Parliament and all.”

“I think, I could support the honour of meeting the mayor of Milton.”

“But them ladies dress so grand!” said Bessy, with an anxious look at
Margaret’s print gown, which her Milton eyes appraised at sevenpence a
yard.

Margaret’s face dimpled up into a merry laugh. “Thank you, Bessy, for
thinking so kindly about my looking nice among all the smart people. But
I’ve plenty of grand gowns,—a week ago, I should have said they were
far too grand for anything I should ever want here. But as I’m to dine
at Mr. Thornton’s, and perhaps to meet the mayor, I shall put on my very
best gown, you may be sure.”

“What win yo’ wear?” asked Bessy, somewhat relieved.

“White silk,” said Margaret. “A gown I had for a cousin’s wedding, a
year ago.”

“That’ll do!” said Bessy, falling back in her chair. “I should be loth
to have yo’ looked down upon.”

“Oh! I’ll be fine enough, if that will save me from being looked down
upon in Milton.”

“I wish I could see you dressed up,” said Bessy. “I reckon, yo’re not
what folk would ca’ pretty; yo’ve not red and white enough for that. But
dun yo’ know, I ha’ dreamt of yo’, long afore ever I seed yo’.”

“Nonsense, Bessy!”

“Ay, but I did. Yo’r very face,—looking wi’ yo’r clear steadfast eyes
out o’ th’ darkness, wi’ yo’r hair blown off from yo’r brow, and going
out like rays round yo’r forehead, which was just as smooth and straight
as it is now,—and yo’ always came to give me strength, which I seemed
to gather out o’ yo’r deep comforting eyes,—and yo’ was drest in
shining raiment—just as yo’r going to be drest. So, yo’ see, it was
yo’!”

“Nay, Bessy,” said Margaret, gently, “it was but a dream.”

“And why might na I dream a dream in my affliction as well as others?
Did not many a one i’ the Bible? Ay, and see visions too! Why, even my
father thinks a deal o’ dreams! I tell yo’ again, I saw yo’ as plainly,
coming swiftly towards me, wi’ yo’r hair blown back wi’ the very
swiftness o’ the motion, just like the way it grows, a little standing
off like; and the white shining dress on yo’ve getten to wear. Let me
come and see yo’ in it. I want to see yo’ and touch yo’ as in very deed
yo’ were in my dream.”

“My dear Bessy, it is quite a fancy of yours.”

“Fancy or no fancy,—yo’ve come, as I knew yo’ would, when I saw yo’r
movement in my dream,—and when yo’re here about me, I reckon I feel
easier in my mind, and comforted, just as a fire comforts one on a dree
day. Yo’ said it were on th’ twenty-first; please God, I’ll come and see
yo’.”

“Oh Bessy! you may come and welcome; but don’t talk so—it really makes
me sorry. It does indeed.”

“Then I’ll keep it to mysel’, if I bite my tongue out. Not but what it’s
true for all that.”

Margaret was silent. At last she said, “Let us talk about it sometimes,
if you think it true. But not now. Tell me, has your father turned out?”

“Ay!” said Bessy heavily—in a manner very different from that she had
spoken in but a minute or two before. “He and many another,—all
Hamper’s men,—and many a one besides. Th’ women are as bad as th’ men,
in their savageness, this time. Food is high,—and they mun have food
for their childer, I reckon. Suppose Thorntons sent ’em their dinner
out,—th’ same money, spent on potatoes and meal, would keep many a
crying baby quiet, and hush up its mother’s heart for a bit!”

“Don’t speak so!” said Margaret. “You’ll make me feel wicked and guilty
in going to this dinner.”

“No!” said Bessy. “Some’s pre-elected to sumptuous feasts, and purple
and fine linen,—may be yo’re one on ’em. Others toil and moil all their
lives long—and the very dogs are not pitiful in our days, as they were
in the days of Lazarus. But if yo’ ask me to cool yo’re tongue wi’ th’
tip of my finger, I’ll come across the great gulf to yo’ just for th’
thought o’ what yo’ve been to me here.”

“Bessy; you’re very feverish! I can tell it in the touch of your hand,
as well us in what you’re saying. It won’t be division enough, in that
awful day, that some of us have been beggars here, and some of us have
been rich,—we shall not be judged by that poor accident, but by our
faithful following of Christ.”

Margaret got up, and found some water; and soaking her
pocket-handkerchief in it, she laid the cool wetness on Bessy’s
forehead, and began to chafe the stone-cold feet. Bessy shut her eyes,
and allowed herself to be soothed. At last she said,

“Yo’d ha’ been deaved out o’ yo’r five wits, as well as me, if yo’d had
one body after another coming in to ask for father, and staying to tell
me each one their tale. Some spoke o’ deadly hatred, and made my blood
run cold wi’ the terrible things they said o’ th’ masters,—but more,
being women, kept plaining, plaining (wi’ the tears running down their
cheeks, and never wiped away, nor heeded), of the price o’ meat, and how
their childer could na sleep at nights for th’ hunger.”

“And do they think the strike will mend this?” asked Margaret.

“They say so,” replied Bessy. “They do say trade has been good for long,
and the masters has made no end o’ money; how much father doesn’t know,
but, in course, th’ Union does; and, as it is natural, they wanted their
share o’ th’ profits, now that food is getting dear; and th’ Union says
they’ll not be doing their duty if they don’t make th’ masters give ’em
their share. But masters has getten th’ upper hand somehow; and I’m
feared they’ll keep it now and evermore. It’s like th’ great battle o’
Armageddon, the way they keep on, grinning and fighting at each other,
till even while they fight, they are picked off into the pit.”

Just then, Nicholas Higgins came in. He caught his daughter’s last
words.

“Ay! and I’ll fight on too; and I’ll got it this time. It’ll not take
long for to make ’em give in, for they’ve getten a pretty lot of
orders, all under contract; and they’ll soon find out they’d better give
us our five per cent. than lose the profit they’ll gain; let alone the
fine for not fulfilling the contract. Aha my masters! I know who’ll
win.”

Margaret fancied from his manner that he must have been drinking, not so
much from what he said, as from the excited way in which he spoke; and
she was rather confirmed in this idea by the evident anxiety Bessie
showed to hasten her departure. Bessy said to her,—

“The twenty-first—that’s Thursday week. I may come and see yo’ dressed
for Thornton’s, I reckon. What time is yo’r dinner?”

Before Margaret could answer, Higgins broke out,—

“Thornton’s! Ar’ t’ going to dine at Thornton’s? Ask him to give yo’ a
bumper to the success of his orders. By th’ twenty-first, I reckon,
he’ll be pottered in his brains how to get ’em done in time. Tell him,
there’s seven hundred ’ll come marching into Marlborough Mills, the
morning after he gives the five per cent., and will help him through his
contract in no time. You’ll have ’em all there. My master, Hamper. He’s
one o’ th’ oud-fashioned sort. Ne’er meets a man bout an oath or a
curse; I should think he were going to die if he spoke me civil; but
arter all, his bark’s waur than his bite, and yo’ may tell him one o’
his turn-outs said so, if yo’ like. Eh! but yo’ll have a lot of prize
mill-owners at Thornton’s! I should like to get speech o’ them, when
they’re a bit inclined to sit still after dinner, and could na run for
the life on ’em. I’d tell ’em my mind. I’d speak up again th’ hard way
they’re driving on us!”

“Good-bye!” said Margaret, hastily. “Good-bye, Bessy! I shall look to
see you on the twenty-first, if you’re well enough.”

The medicines and treatment which Dr. Donaldson had ordered for Mrs.
Hale, did her so much good at first that not only she herself, but
Margaret, began to hope that he might have been mistaken, and that she
could recover permanently. As for Mr. Hale, although he had never had an
idea of the serious nature of their apprehensions, he triumphed over
their fears with an evident relief, which proved how much his glimpse
into the nature of them had affected him. Only Dixon croaked for ever
into Margaret’s ear. However, Margaret defied the raven, and would hope.

They needed this gleam of brightness in-doors, for out-of-doors, even to
their uninstructed eyes, there was a gloomy brooding appearance of
discontent. Mr. Hale had his own acquaintances among the working men,
and was depressed with their earnestly-told tales of suffering and
long-endurance. They would have scorned to speak of what they had to
bear to any one who might, from his position, have understood it without
their words. But here was this man, from a distant county, who was
perplexed by the workings of a system into the midst of which he was
thrown, and each was eager to make him a judge, and to bring witness of
his own causes for irritation. Then Mr. Hale brought all his budget of
grievances, and laid it before Mr. Thornton, for him, with his
experience as a master, to arrange them, and explain their origin; which
he always did, on sound economical principles; showing that, as trade
was conducted, there must always be a waxing and waning of commercial
prosperity; and that in the waning a certain number of masters, as well
as of men, must go down into ruin, and be no more seen among the ranks
of the happy and prosperous. He spoke as if this consequence were so
entirely logical, that neither employers nor employed had any right to
complain if it became their fate: the employer to turn aside from the
race he could no longer run, with a bitter sense of incompetency and
failure—wounded in the struggle—trampled down by his fellows in their
haste to get rich—slighted where he was once honoured—humbly asking
for, instead of bestowing, employment with a lordly hand. Of course,
speaking so of the fate that, as a master, might be his own in the
fluctuations of commerce, he was not likely to have more sympathy with
that of the workmen, who were passed by in the swift merciless
improvement or alteration; who would fain lie down and quietly die out
of the world that needed them not, but felt as they could never rest in
their graves for the clinging cries of the beloved and helpless they
would leave behind; who envied the power of the wild bird, that can feed
her young with her very heart’s blood. Margaret’s whole soul rose up
against him while he reasoned in this way—as if commerce were
everything and humanity nothing. She could hardly thank him for the
individual kindness, which brought him that very evening to offer
her—for the delicacy which made him understand that he must offer her
privately—every convenience for illness that his own wealth or his
mother’s foresight had caused them to accumulate in their household, and
which, as he learnt from Dr. Donaldson, Mrs. Hale might possibly
require. His presence, after the way he had spoken—his bringing before
her the doom, which she was vainly trying to persuade herself might yet
be averted from her mother—all conspired to set Margaret’s teeth on
edge, as she looked at him, and listened to him. What business had he to
be the only person, except Dr. Donaldson and Dixon, admitted to the
awful secret, which she held shut up in the most dark and sacred recess
of her heart—not daring to look at it, unless she invoked heavenly
strength to bear the sight—that, some day soon, she should cry aloud
for her mother, and no answer would come out of the blank, dumb
darkness? Yet he knew all. She saw it in his pitying eyes. She heard it
in his grave and tremulous voice. How reconcile those eyes, that voice,
with the hard, reasoning, dry, merciless way in which he laid down
axioms of trade, and serenely followed them out to their full
consequences? The discord jarred upon her inexpressibly. The more
because of the gathering woe of which she heard from Bessy. To be sure,
Nicholas Higgins, the father, spoke differently. He had been appointed a
committee-man, and said that he knew secrets of which the exoteric knew
nothing. He said this more expressly and particularly, on the very day
before Mrs. Thornton’s dinner-party. When Margaret, going in to speak to
Bessy, found him arguing the point with Boucher, the neighbour of whom
she had frequently heard mention, as by turns exciting Higgins’s
compassion, as an unskilful workman with a large family depending upon
him for support, and at other times enraging his more energetic and
sanguine neighbour by his want of what the latter called spirit. It was
very evident that Higgins was in a passion when Margaret entered.
Boucher stood, with both hands on the rather high mantelpiece, swaying
himself a little on the support which his arms, thus placed, gave him,
and looking wildly into the fire, with a kind of despair that irritated
Higgins, even while it went to his heart. Bessy was rocking herself
violently backwards and forwards, as was her wont (Margaret knew by this
time) when she was agitated. Her sister Mary was tying on her bonnet (in
great clumsy bows, as suited her great clumsy fingers), to go to her
fustian-cutting, blubbering out loud the while, and evidently longing to
be away from a scene that distressed her.

Margaret came in upon this scene. She stood for a moment at the
door—then, her finger on her lips, she stole to a seat on the squab
near Bessy. Nicholas saw her come in, and greeted her with a gruff, but
not unfriendly nod. Mary hurried out of the house, catching gladly at
the open door, and crying aloud when she got away from her father’s
presence. It was only John Boucher that took no notice whatever who came
in and who went out.

“It’s no use, Higgins. Hoo cannot live long a’ this’n. Hoo’s just
sinking away—not for want o’ meat hersel’—but because hoo cannot stand
th’ sight o’ the little ones clemming. Ay, clemming! Five shilling a
week may do well enough for thee, wi’ but two mouths to fill, and one on
’em a wench who can well earn her own meat. But it’s clemming to us. An’
I tell thee plain—if hoo dies, as I’m ’feard hoo will afore we’ve
getten th’ five per cent., I’ll fling the money back i’ th’ master’s
face, and say, ‘Be domned to yo’; be domned to th’ whole cruel world o’
yo’; that could na leave me th’ best wife that ever bore childer to a
man. An’ look thee lad, I’ll hate thee, and th’ whole pack o’ th’ Union.
Ay, an’ chase yo’ through heaven wi’ my hatred,—I will, lad! I
will,—if yo’re leading me astray i’ this matter. Thou saidst, Nicholas,
on Wednesday sennight—and it’s now Tuesday i’ th’ second week—that
afore a fortnight we’d ha’ the masters coming a-begging to us to take
back our work, at our own wage—and time’s nearly up,—and there’s our
lile Jack lying a-bed, too weak to cry, but just every now and then
sobbing up his heart for want o’ food,—our lile Jack, I tell thee, lad!
Hoo’s never looked up sin’ he were born, and hoo loves him as if he were
her very life,—as he is,—for I reckon he’ll ha’ cost me that precious
price,—our lile Jack, who wakened me each morn wi’ putting his sweet
little lips to my great rough fou’ face, a-seeking a smooth place to
kiss,—an’ he lies clemming.” Here the deep sobs choked the poor man and
Nicholas looked up, with eyes brimful of tears, to Margaret, before he
could gain courage to speak.

“Hou’d up, man. Thy lile Jack shall na’ clem. I ha’ gotten brass, and
we’ll go buy the chap a sup o’ milk an’ a good four-pounder this very
minute. What’s mine’s thine, sure enough, i’ thou’st i’ want. Only,
dunnot lose heart, man!” continued he, as he fumbled in a tea-pot for
what money he had. “I lay yo my heart and soul we’ll win for a’ this:
it’s but bearing on one more week, and yo’ just see th’ way th’ masters
’ll come round, praying on us to come back to our mills. An’ the
Union—that’s to say, I—will take care yo’ve enough for th’ childer and
th’ missus. So dunnot turn faint-heart, and go to th’ tyrants a-seeking
work.”

The man turned round at these words,—turned round a face so white, and
gaunt, and tear-furrowed, and hopeless, that its very calm forced
Margaret to weep.

“Yo’ know well, that a worser tyrant than e’er th’ masters were says,
‘Clem to death, and see ’em a’ clem to death, ere yo’ dare go again th’
Union.’ Yo’ know it well, Nicholas, for a’ yo’re one on e’m. Yo’ may be
kind hearts, each separate; but once banded together, yo’ve no more pity
for a man than a wild hunger-maddened wolf.”

Nicholas had his hand on the lock of the door—he stopped and turned
round on Boucher, close following:

“So help me God! man alive—if I think not I’m doing best for thee, and
for all on us. If I’m going wrong when I think I’m going right, it’s
their sin, who ha’ left me where I am, in my ignorance. I ha’ thought
till my brains ached,—Beli’ me, John, I have. An’ I say again, there’s
no help for us but having faith i’ th’ Union. They’ll win the day, see
if they dunnot!”

Not one word had Margaret or Bessy spoken. They had hardly uttered the
sighing, that the eyes of each called to the other to bring up from the
depths of her heart. At last Bessy said,

“I never thought to hear father call on God again. But yo’ heard him
say, ‘So help me God!’”

“Yes!” said Margaret. “Let me bring you what money I can spare,—let me
bring you a little food for that poor man’s children. Don’t let them
know it comes from any one but your father. It will be but little.”

Bessy lay back without taking any notice of what Margaret said. She did
not cry—she only quivered up her breath.

“My heart’s drained dry o’ tears,” she said. “Boucher’s been in these
days past, a telling me of his fears and his troubles. He’s but a weak
kind of chap, I know, but he’s a man for a’ that; and tho’ I’ve been
angry, many a time afore now, wi’ him an’ his wife, as knew no more nor
him how to manage, yet yo’ see, all folks isn’t wise, yet God lets ’em
live—ay, an’ gives ’em some one to love, and be loved by, just as good
as Solomon. An’ if sorrow comes to them they love, it hurts ’em as sore
as e’er it did Solomon. I can’t make it out. Perhaps it’s as well such a
one as Boucher has th’ Union to see after him. But I’d just like for to
see th’ men as make th’ Union, and put ’em one by one face to face wi’
Boucher. I reckon, if they heard him, the’d tell him (if I cotched ’em
one by one), he might go back and get what he could for his work, even
if it weren’t so much as they ordered.”

Margaret sat utterly silent. How was she ever to go away into comfort
and forget that man’s voice, with the tone of unutterable agony, telling
more by far than his words of what he had to suffer? She took out her
purse; she had not much in it of what she could call her own, but what
she had she put into Bessy’s hands without speaking.

“Thank yo’. There’s many on ’em gets no more, and is not so bad
off,—leastways does not show it as he does. But father won’t let ’em
want, now he knows. Yo’ see, Boucher’s been pulled down wi’ his
childer,—and her being so cranky, and a’ they could pawn has gone this
last twelvemonth. Yo’re not to think we’d ha’ letten ’em clem, for all
we’re a bit pressed oursel’; if neighbours doesn’t see after neighbours,
I dunno who will.” Bessy seemed almost afraid lest Margaret should think
they had not the will, and, to a certain degree, the power of helping
one whom she evidently regarded as having a claim upon them. “Besides,”
she went on, “father is sure and positive the masters must give in
within these next few days,—that they canna hould on much longer. But I
thank yo’ all the same,—I thank yo’ for mysel’, as much as for Boucher,
for it jus makes my heart warm to yo’ more and more.”

Bessy seemed much quieter to-day, but fearfully languid and exhausted.
As she finished speaking, she looked so faint and weary that Margaret
became alarmed.

“It’s nout,” said Bessy. “It’s not death yet. I had a fearfu’ night wi’
dreams—or somewhat like dreams, for I were wide awake—and I’m all in a
swounding daze to-day,—only yon poor chap made me alive again. No! it’s
not death yet, but death is not far off. Ay. Cover me up, and I’ll may
be sleep, if th’ cough will let me. Good night—good afternoon, m’appen
I should say—but th’ light is dim an’ misty to-day.”




CHAPTER XX.

MEN AND GENTLEMEN.

    “Old and young, boy, let ’em all eat, I have it;
    Let ’em have ten tire of teeth a-piece, I care not.”
              ROLLO, DUKE OF NORMANDY.


Margaret went home so painfully occupied with what she had heard and
seen that she hardly knew how to rouse herself up to the duties which
awaited her; the necessity for keeping up a constant flow of cheerful
conversation for her mother, who, now that she was unable to go out,
always looked to Margaret’s return from the shortest walk as bringing in
some news.

“And can your factory friend come on Thursday to see you dressed?”

“She was so ill I never thought of asking her,” said Margaret,
dolefully.

“Dear! Everybody is ill now, I think,” said Mrs. Hale, with a little of
the jealousy which one invalid is apt to feel of another. “But it must
be very sad to be ill in one of those little back streets.” (Her kindly
nature prevailing, and the old Helstone habits of thought returning.)
“It’s bad enough here. What could you do for her, Margaret? Mr. Thornton
has sent me some of his old port wine since you went out. Would a bottle
of that do her good, think you?”

“No, mamma! I don’t believe they are very poor,—at least, they don’t
speak as if they were; and, at any rate, Bessy’s illness is
consumption—she won’t want wine. Perhaps, I might take her a little
preserve, made of our dear Helstone fruit. No! there’s another family to
whom I should like to give—Oh mamma, mamma! how am I to dress up in my
finery, and go off and away to smart parties, after the sorrow I’ve seen
to-day?” exclaimed Margaret, bursting the bounds she had preordained for
herself before she came in, and telling her mother what she had seen and
heard at Higgins’s cottage.

It distressed Mrs. Hale excessively. It made her restlessly irritated
till she could do something. She directed Margaret to pack up a basket
in the very drawing-room, to be sent there and then to the family; and
was almost angry with her for saying, that it would not signify if it
did not go till morning, as she knew Higgins had provided for their
immediate wants, and she herself had left money with Bessy. Mrs. Hale
called her unfeeling for saying this; and never gave herself
breathing-time till the basket was sent out of the house. Then she said:

“After all, we may have been doing wrong. It was only the last time Mr.
Thornton was here that he said, those were no true friends who helped to
prolong the struggle by assisting the turn-outs. And this Boucher-man
was a turn-out, was he not?”

The question was referred to Mr. Hale by his wife, when he came
upstairs, fresh from giving a lesson to Mr. Thornton, which had ended in
conversation, as was their wont. Margaret did not care if their gifts
had prolonged the strife; she did not think far enough for that, in her
present excited state.

Mr. Hale listened, and tried to be as calm as a judge; he recalled all
that had seemed so clear not half-an-hour before, as it came out of Mr.
Thornton’s lips; and then he made an unsatisfactory compromise. His wife
and daughter had not only done quite right in this instance, but he did
not see for a moment how they could have done otherwise. Nevertheless,
as a general rule, it was very true what Mr. Thornton said, that as the
strike, if prolonged, must end in the masters bringing hands from a
distance (if, indeed, the final result were not, as it had often been
before, the invention of some machine which would diminish the need of
hands at all), why, it was clear enough that the kindest thing was to
refuse all help which might bolster them up in their folly. But as to
this Boucher, he would go and see him the first thing in the morning,
and try and find out what could be done for him.

Mr. Hale went the next morning, as he proposed. He did not find Boucher
at home, but he had a long talk with his wife; promised to ask for an
Infirmary order for her; and, seeing the plenty provided by Mrs. Hale, and
somewhat lavishly used by the children, who were masters downstairs in
their father’s absence, he came back with a more consoling and cheerful
account than Margaret had dared to hope for; indeed, what she had said
the night before had prepared her father for so much worse a state of
things that, by a re-action of his imagination, he described all as
better than it really was.

“But I will go again, and see the man himself,” said Mr. Hale. “I hardly
know as yet how to compare one of these houses with our Helstone
cottages. I see furniture here which our labourers would never have
thought of buying, and food commonly used which they would consider
luxuries; yet for these very families there seems no other resource now
that their weekly wages are stopped, but the pawn-shop. One had need to
learn a different standard, up here in Milton.”

Bessy, too, was rather better this day. Still she was so weak that she
seemed to have entirely forgotten her wish to see Margaret dressed—if,
indeed, that had not been the feverish desire of a half delirious state.

Margaret could not help comparing this strange dressing of hers, to go
where she did not care to be—her heart heavy with various
anxieties—with the old, merry, girlish toilettes that she and Edith had
performed scarcely more than a year ago. Her only pleasure now in
decking herself out was in thinking that her mother would take delight
in seeing her dressed. She blushed when Dixon, throwing the drawing-room
door open, made an appeal for admiration.

“Miss Hale looks well, ma’am,—doesn’t she? Mrs. Shaw’s coral couldn’t
have come in better. It just gives the right touch of colour, ma’am.
Otherwise, Miss Margaret, you would have been too pale.”

Margaret’s black hair was too thick to be plaited; it needed rather to
be twisted round and round, and have its fine silkiness compressed into
massive coils, that encircled her head like a crown, and then were
gathered into a large spiral knot behind. She kept its weight together
by two large coral pins, like small arrows for length. Her white silk
sleeves were looped up with strings of the same material, and on her
neck, just below the base of her curved and milk-white throat, there lay
heavy coral beads.

“Oh, Margaret! how I should like to be going with you to one of the old
Barrington assemblies,—taking you as Lady Beresford used to take me.”

Margaret kissed her mother for this little burst of maternal vanity; but
she could hardly smile at it, she felt so much out of spirits.

“I would rather stay at home with you,—much rather, mamma.”

“Nonsense, darling! Be sure you notice the dinner well. I shall like to
hear how they manage these things in Milton. Particularly the second
course, dear. Look what they have instead of game.”

Mrs. Hale would have been more than interested,—she would have been
astonished, if she had seen the sumptuousness of the dinner-table and
its appointments. Margaret, with her London cultivated taste, felt the
number of delicacies to be oppressive; one half of the quantity would
have been enough, and the effect tighter and more elegant. But it was
one of Mrs. Thornton’s rigorous laws of hospitality, that of each
separate dainty enough should be provided for all the guests to partake,
if they felt inclined. Careless to abstemiousness in her daily habits,
it was part of her pride to set a feast before such of her guests as
cared for it. Her son shared this feeling. He had never known—though he
might have imagined, and had the capability to relish—any kind of
society but that which depended on an exchange of superb meals: and even
now, though he was denying himself the personal expenditure of an
unnecessary sixpence, and had more than once regretted that the
invitations for this dinner had been sent out, still, as it was to be,
he was glad to see the old magnificence of preparation.

Margaret and her father were the first to arrive. Mr. Hale was anxiously
punctual to the time specified. There was no one upstairs in the
drawing-room but Mrs. Thornton and Fanny. Every cover was taken off, and
the apartment blazed forth in yellow silk damask and a brilliantly
flowered carpet. Every corner seemed filled up with ornament, until it
became a weariness to the eye, and presented a strange contrast to the
bald ugliness of the look-out into the great mill-yard, where wide
folding gates were thrown open for the admission of carriages. The mill
loomed high on the left-hand side of the windows, casting a shadow down
from its many stories, which darkened the summer evening before its
time.

“My son was engaged up to the last moment on business. He will be here
directly, Mr. Hale. May I beg you to take a seat?”

Mr. Hale was standing at one of the windows as Mrs. Thornton spoke. He
turned away, saying,

“Don’t you find such close neighbourhood to the mill rather unpleasant
at times?”

She drew herself up:

“Never. I am not become so fine as to desire to forget the source of my
son’s wealth and power. Besides, there is not such another factory in
Milton. One room alone is two hundred and twenty square yards.”

“I meant that the smoke and the noise—the constant going out and coming
in of the workpeople, might be annoying!”

“I agree with you, Mr. Hale!” said Fanny. “There is a continual smell of
steam and oily machinery—and the noise is perfectly deafening.”

“I have heard noise that was called music far more deafening. The
engine-room is at the street-end of the factory; we hardly hear it,
except in summer weather, when all the windows are open; and as for the
continual murmur of the workpeople, it disturbs me no more than the
humming of a hive of bees. If I think of it at all, I connect it with my
son, and feel how all belongs to him, and that his is the head that
directs it. Just now, there are no sounds to come from the mill; the
hands have been ungrateful enough to turn out, as perhaps you have
heard. But the very business (of which I spoke when you entered), had
reference to the steps he is going to take to make them learn their
place.” The expression on her face, always stern, deepened into dark
anger, as she said this. Nor did it clear away when Mr. Thornton entered
the room; for she saw in an instant, the weight of care and anxiety
which he could not shake off, although his guests received from him a
greeting that appeared both cheerful and cordial. He shook hands with
Margaret. He knew it was the first time their hands had met, though she
was perfectly unconscious of the fact. He inquired after Mrs. Hale, and
heard Mr. Hale’s sanguine, hopeful account; and, glancing to Margaret,
to understand how far she agreed with her father, he saw that no
dissenting shadow crossed her face. And as he looked with this
intention, he was struck anew with her great beauty. He had never seen
her in such dress before; and yet now it appeared that such elegance of
attire was so befitting her noble figure and lofty serenity of
countenance that she ought to go always thus apparelled. She was talking
to Fanny; about what he could not hear; but he saw his sister’s restless
way of continually arranging some part of her gown, her wandering eyes,
now glancing here, now there, but without any purpose in her
observation; and he contrasted them uneasily with the large soft eyes
that looked forth steadily at one object, as if from out their light
beamed some gentle influence of repose: the curving lines of the red
lips, just parted in the interest of listening to what her companion
said—the head a little bent forwards, so as to make a long sweeping
line from the summit, where the light caught on the glossy raven hair,
to the smooth ivory tip of the shoulder; the round white arms, and taper
hands, laid lightly across each other, but perfectly motionless in their
pretty attitude. Mr. Thornton sighed as he took in all this with one of
his sudden comprehensive glances. And then he turned his back to the
young ladies, and threw himself, with an effort, but with all his heart
and soul, into a conversation with Mr. Hale.

More people came—more and more. Fanny left Margaret’s side and helped
her mother to receive her guests. Mr. Thornton felt that in this influx
no one was speaking to Margaret, and was restless under this apparent
neglect. But he never went near her himself; he did not look at her.
Only, he knew what she was doing—or not doing—better than he knew the
movements of any one else in the room. Margaret was so unconscious of
herself, and so much amused by watching other people, that she never
thought whether she was left unnoticed or not. Somebody took her down to
dinner; she did not catch the name; nor did he seem much inclined to
talk to her. There was a very animated conversation going on among the
gentlemen; the ladies, for the most part, were silent, employing
themselves in taking notes of the dinner and criticising each other’s
dresses. Margaret caught the clue to the general conversation, grew
interested and listened attentively. Mr. Horsfall, the stranger, whose
visit to the town was the original germ of the party, was asking
questions relative to the trade and manufactures of the place; and the
rest of the gentlemen—all Milton men—were giving him answers and
explanations. Some dispute arose, which was warmly contested; it was
referred to Mr. Thornton, who had hardly spoken before; but who now
gave an opinion, the grounds of which were so clearly stated that even
the opponents yielded. Margaret’s attention was thus called to her host;
his whole manner, as master of the house, and entertainer of his
friends, was so straightforward, yet simple and modest, as to be
thoroughly dignified. Margaret thought she had never seen him to so much
advantage. When he had come to their house, there had been always
something, either of over-eagerness or of that kind of vexed annoyance
which seemed ready to pre-suppose that he was unjustly judged, and yet
felt too proud to try and make himself better understood. But now, among
his fellows, there was no uncertainty as to his position. He was
regarded by them as a man of great force of character; of power in many
ways. There was no need to struggle for their respect. He had it, and he
knew it; and the security of this gave a fine grand quietness to his
voice and ways, which Margaret had missed before.

He was not in the habit of talking to ladies; and what he did say was a
little formal. To Margaret herself he hardly spoke at all. She was
surprised to think how much she enjoyed this dinner. She knew enough now
to understand many local interests—nay, even some of the technical
words employed by the eager millowners. She silently took a very decided
part in the question they were discussing. At any rate, they talked in
desperate earnest,—not in the used-up style that wearied her so in the
old London parties. She wondered that, with all this dwelling on the
manufacturers and trade of the place, no allusion was made to the strike
then pending. She did not yet know how coolly such things were taken by
the masters, as having only one possible end. To be sure, the men were
cutting their own throats, as they had done many a time before; but if
they would be fools, and put themselves into the hands of a rascally set
of paid delegates, they must take the consequence. One or two thought
Thornton looked out of spirits; and, of course, he must lose by this
turn-out. But it was an accident that might happen to themselves any
day; and Thornton was as good to manage a strike as any one; for he was
as iron a chap as any in Milton. The hands had mistaken their man in
trying that dodge on him. And they chuckled inwardly at the idea of the
workmen’s discomfiture and defeat, in their attempt to alter one iota of
what Thornton had decreed.

It was rather dull for Margaret after dinner. She was glad when the
gentlemen came, not merely because she caught her father’s eye to
brighten her sleepiness up; but because she could listen to something
larger and grander than the petty interests which the ladies had been
talking about. She liked the exultation in the sense of power which
these Milton men had. It might be rather rampant in its display, and
savour of boasting; but still they seemed to defy the old limits of
possibility, in a kind of fine intoxication, caused by the recollection
of what had been achieved, and what yet should be. If in her cooler
moments she might not approve of the spirit in all things, still there
was much to admire in their forgetfulness of themselves and the present,
in their anticipated triumphs over all inanimate matter at some future
time which none of them would live to see. She was rather startled when
Mr. Thornton spoke to her close at her elbow:

“I could see you were on our side in our discussion at dinner,—were you
not, Miss Hale?”

“Certainly. But then I know so little about it. I was surprised,
however, to find from what Mr. Horsfall said, that there were others who
thought in so diametrically opposite a manner, as the Mr. Morison he
spoke about. He cannot be a gentleman—is he?”

“I am not quite the person to decide on another’s gentlemanliness, Miss
Hale. I mean, I don’t quite understand your application of the word. But
I should say that this Morison is no true man. I don’t know who he is; I
merely judge him from Mr. Horsfall’s account.”

“I suspect my ‘gentleman’ includes your ‘true man.’”

“And a great deal more, you would imply. I differ from you. A man is to
me a higher and a completer being than a gentleman.”

“What do you mean?” asked Margaret. “We must understand the words
differently.”

“I take it that ‘gentleman’ is a term that only describes a person in
his relation to others; but when we speak of him as ‘a man,’ we consider
him not merely with regard to his fellow-men, but in relation to
himself,—to life—to time—to eternity. A cast-away lonely as Robinson
Crusoe—a prisoner immured in a dungeon for life—nay, even a saint in
Patmos, has his endurance, his strength, his faith, best described by
being spoken of as ‘a man.’ I am rather weary of this word
‘gentlemanly,’ which seems to me to be often inappropriately used, and
often, too, with such exaggerated distortion of meaning, while the full
simplicity of the noun ‘man,’ and the adjective ‘manly’ are
acknowledged—that I am induced to class it with the cant of the day.”

Margaret thought a moment—but before she could speak her slow
conviction, he was called away by some of the eager manufacturers, whose
speeches she could not hear, though she could guess at their import by
the short clear answers Mr. Thornton gave, which came steady and firm as
the boom of a distant minute gun. They were evidently talking of the
turn-out, and suggesting what course had best be pursued. She heard Mr.
Thornton say:

“That has been done.” Then came a hurried murmur, in which two or three
joined.

“All those arrangements have been made.”

Some doubts were implied, some difficulties named by Mr. Slickson, who
took hold of Mr. Thornton’s arm, the better to impress his words. Mr.
Thornton moved slightly away, lifted his eyebrows a very little, and
then replied:

“I take the risk. You need not join in it unless you choose.” Still some
more fears were urged.

“I’m not afraid of anything so dastardly as incendiarism. We are open
enemies; and I can protect myself from any violence that I apprehend.
And I will assuredly protect all others who come to me for work. They
know my determination by this time, as well and as fully as you do.”

Mr. Horsfall took him a little on one side, as Margaret conjectured, to
ask him some other question about the strike; but, in truth, it was to
inquire who she herself was—so quiet, so stately, and so beautiful.

“A Milton lady?” asked he, as the name was given.

“No! from the south of England—Hampshire, I believe,” was the cold,
indifferent answer.

Mrs. Slickson was catechising Fanny on the same subject.

“Who is that fine distinguished-looking girl? a sister of Mr.
Horsfall’s?”

“Oh dear, no! That is Mr. Hale, her father, talking now to Mr. Stephens.
He gives lessons; that is to say, he reads with young men. My brother
John goes to him twice a week, and so he begged mamma to ask them here,
in hopes of getting him known. I believe we have some of their
prospectuses, if you would like to have one.”

“Mr. Thornton! Does he really find time to read with a tutor, in the
midst of all his business,—and this abominable strike in hand as well?”

Fanny was not sure, from Mrs. Slickson’s manner, whether she ought to be
proud or ashamed of her brother’s conduct; and, like all people who try
and take other people’s “ought” for the rule of their feelings, she was
inclined to blush for any singularity of action. Her shame was
interrupted by the dispersion of the guests.




CHAPTER XXI.

THE DARK NIGHT.

              “On earth is known to none
    The smile that is not sister to a tear.”
                                ELLIOTT.


Margaret and her father walked home. The night was fine, the streets
clean, and with her pretty white silk, like Leezie Lindsay’s gown o’
green satin, in the ballad, “kilted up to her knee,” she was off with
her father—ready to dance along with the excitement of the cool, fresh
night air.

“I rather think Thornton is not quite easy in his mind about this
strike. He seemed very anxious to-night.”

“I should wonder if he were not. But he spoke with his usual coolness to
the others, when they suggested different things, just before we came
away.”

“So he did after dinner as well. It would take a good deal to stir him
from his cool manner of speaking; but his face strikes me as anxious.”

“I should be, if I were he. He must know of the growing anger and hardly
smothered hatred of his workpeople, who all looked upon him as what the
Bible calls a ‘hard man,’—not so much unjust as unfeeling; clear in
judgment, standing upon his ‘rights’ as no human being ought to stand,
considering what we and all our petty rights are in the sight of the
Almighty. I am glad you think he looks anxious. When I remember
Boucher’s half mad words and ways, I cannot bear to think how coolly Mr.
Thornton spoke.”

“In the first place, I am not so convinced as you are about that man
Boucher’s utter distress; for the moment, he was badly off, I don’t
doubt. But there is always a mysterious supply of money from these
Unions; and, from what you said, it was evident the man was of a
passionate, demonstrative nature, and gave strong expression to all he
felt.”

“Oh, papa!”

“Well! I only want you to do justice to Mr. Thornton, who is, I suspect,
of an exactly opposite nature—a man who is far too proud to show his
feelings. Just the character I should have thought beforehand, you would
have admired, Margaret.”

“So I do—so I should; but I don’t feel quite so sure as you do of the
existence of those feelings. He is a man of great strength of
character—of unusual intellect, considering the few advantages he has
had.”

“Not so few. He has led a practical life from a very early age, has been
called upon to exercise judgment and self-control. All that developes
one part of the intellect. To be sure, he needs some of the knowledge of
the past, which gives the truest basis for conjecture as to the future;
but he knows this need—he perceives it, and that is something. You are
quite prejudiced against Mr. Thornton, Margaret.”

“He is the first specimen of a manufacturer—of a person engaged in
trade—that I had ever the opportunity of studying, papa. He is my first
olive: let me make a face while I swallow it. I know he is good of his
kind, and by and by I shall like the kind. I rather think I am already
beginning to do so. I was very much interested by what the gentlemen
were talking about, although I did not understand half of it. I was
quite sorry when Miss Thornton came to take me to the other end of the
room, saying she was sure I should be uncomfortable at being the only
lady among so many gentlemen. I had never thought about it, I was so
busy listening; and the ladies were so dull, papa—oh, so dull! Yet I
think it was clever too. It reminded me of our old game of having each
so many nouns to introduce into a sentence.”

“What do you mean, child?” asked Mr. Hale.

“Why, they took nouns that were signs of things which gave evidence of
wealth,—housekeepers, under-gardeners, extent of glass, valuable lace,
diamonds, and all such things; and each one formed her speech so as to
bring them all in, in the prettiest accidental manner possible.”

“You will be as proud of your one servant when you get her, if all is
true about her that Mrs. Thornton says.”

“To be sure, I shall. I felt like a great hypocrite to-night, sitting
there in my white silk gown, with my idle hands before me, when I
remembered all the good, thorough, house-work they had done to-day. They
took me for a fine lady, I’m sure.”

“Even I was mistaken enough to think you looked like a lady, my dear,”
said Mr. Hale, quietly smiling.

But smiles were changed to white and trembling looks when they saw
Dixon’s face, as she opened the door.

“Oh, master!—Oh, Miss Margaret! Thank God you are come! Dr. Donaldson
is here. The servant next door went for him, for the charwoman is gone
home. She’s better now; but, oh sir! I thought she’d have died an hour
ago.”

Mr. Hale caught Margaret’s arm to steady himself from falling. He looked
at her face, and saw an expression upon it of surprise and extremest
sorrow, but not the agony of terror that contracted his own unprepared
heart. She knew more than he did, and yet she listened with that
hopeless expression of awed apprehension.

“Oh! I should not have left her—wicked daughter that I am!” moaned
forth Margaret, as she supported her trembling father’s hasty steps
upstairs. Dr. Donaldson met them on the landing.

“She is better now,” he whispered. “The opiate has taken effect. The
spasms were very bad: no wonder they frightened your maid; but she’ll
rally this time.”

“This time! Let me go to her!” Half an hour ago Mr. Hale was a
middle-aged man; now his sight was dim, his senses wavering, his walk
tottering, as if he were seventy years of age.

Dr. Donaldson took his arm, and led him into the bedroom. Margaret
followed close. There lay her mother, with an unmistakeable look on her
face. She might be better now; she was sleeping, but Death had signed
her for his own, and it was clear that ere long he would return to take
possession. Mr. Hale looked at her for some time without a word. Then he
began to shake all over, and, turning away from Dr. Donaldson’s anxious
care, he groped to find the door; he could not see it, although several
candles, brought in the sudden affright, were burning and flaring there.
He staggered into the drawing-room, and felt about for a chair. Dr.
Donaldson wheeled one to him, and placed him in it. He felt his pulse.

“Speak to him, Miss Hale. We must rouse him.”

“Papa!” said Margaret, with a crying voice that was wild with pain.
“Papa! Speak to me!” The speculation came again into his eyes, and he
made a great effort.

“Margaret, did you know of this? Oh, it was cruel of you!”

“No, sir, it was not cruel!” replied Dr. Donaldson, with quick decision.
“Miss Hale acted under my directions. There may have been a mistake, but
it was not cruel. Your wife will be a different creature to-morrow, I
trust. She has had spasms, as I anticipated, though I did not tell Miss
Hale of my apprehensions. She has taken the opiate I brought with me;
she will have a good long sleep; and to-morrow that look which has
alarmed you so much will have passed away.”

“But not the disease?”

Dr. Donaldson glanced at Margaret. Her bent head, her face raised with
no appeal for a temporary reprieve, showed that quick observer of human
nature that she thought it better that the whole truth should be told.

“Not the disease. We cannot touch the disease, with all our poor vaunted
skill. We can only delay its progress—alleviate the pain it causes. Be
a man, sir—a Christian. Have faith in the immortality of the soul,
which no pain, no mortal disease, can assail or touch!”

But all the reply he got was in the choked words, “You have never been
married, Dr. Donaldson; you don’t know what it is,” and in the deep,
manly sobs, which went through the stillness of the night like heavy
pulses of agony.

Margaret knelt by him, caressing him with tearful caresses. No one, not
even Dr. Donaldson, knew how the time went by. Mr. Hale was the first to
dare to speak of the necessities of the present moment.

“What must we do?” asked he. “Tell us both. Margaret is my staff—my
right hand.”

Dr. Donaldson gave his clear, sensible directions. No fear for
to-night—nay, even peace for to-morrow, and for many days yet. But no
enduring hope of recovery. He advised Mr. Hale to go to bed, and leave
only one to watch the slumber, which he hoped would be undisturbed. He
promised to come again early in the morning. And, with a warm and kindly
shake of the hand, he left them.

They spoke but few words; they were too much exhausted by their terror
to do more than decide upon the immediate course of action. Mr. Hale was
resolved to sit up through the night, and all that Margaret could do was
to prevail upon him to rest on the drawing-room sofa. Dixon stoutly and
bluntly refused to go to bed; and, as for Margaret, it was simply
impossible that she should leave her mother, let all the doctors in the
world speak of “husbanding resources,” and “one watcher only being
required.” So, Dixon sat, and stared, and winked, and drooped, and
picked herself up again with a jerk, and finally gave up the battle, and
fairly snored. Margaret had taken off her gown and tossed it aside with
a sort of impatient disgust, and put on her dressing-gown. She felt as
if she never could sleep again; as if her whole senses were acutely
vital, and all endued with double keenness, for the purpose of watching.
Every sight and sound—nay, even every thought, touched some nerve to
the very quick. For more than two hours, she heard her father’s restless
movements in the next room. He came perpetually to the door of her
mother’s chamber, pausing there to listen, till she, not hearing his
close unseen presence, went and opened it to tell him how all went on,
in reply to the questions his baked lips could hardly form. At last he,
too, fell asleep, and all the house was still. Margaret sat behind the
curtain thinking. Far away in time, far away in space, seemed all the
interests of past days. Not more than thirty-six hours ago, she cared
for Bessy Higgins and her father, and her heart was wrung for Boucher;
now, that was all like a dreaming memory of some former
life;—everything that had passed out of doors seemed dissevered from
her mother, and therefore unreal. Even Harley Street appeared more
distinct; there she remembered, as if it were yesterday, how she had
pleased herself with tracing out her mother’s features in her Aunt
Shaw’s face,—and how letters had come, making her dwell on the thoughts
of home with all the longing of love. Helstone, itself, was in the dim
past. The dull gray days of the preceding winter and spring, so
uneventless and monotonous, seemed more associated with what she cared
for now above all price. She would fain have caught at the skirts of
that departing time, and prayed it to return, and give her back what she
had too little valued while it was yet in her possession. What a vain
show Life seemed! How unsubstantial, and flickering, and flitting! It
was as if from some aërial belfry, high up above the stir and jar of the
earth, there was a bell continually tolling, “All are shadows!—all are
passing!—all is past!” And when the morning dawned, cool and gray, like
many a happier morning before—when Margaret looked one by one at the
sleepers, it seemed as if the terrible night were unreal as a dream; it,
too, was a shadow. It, too, was past.

Mrs. Hale herself was not aware when she awoke, how ill she had been the
night before. She was rather surprised at Dr. Donaldson’s early visit,
and perplexed by the anxious faces of husband and child. She consented
to remain in bed that day, saying she certainly was tired; but, the
next, she insisted on getting up; and Dr. Donaldson gave his consent to
her returning into the drawing-room. She was restless and uncomfortable
in every position, and before night she became very feverish. Mr. Hale
was utterly listless, and incapable of deciding on anything.

“What can we do to spare mamma such another night?” asked Margaret on
the third day.

“It is to a certain degree, the reaction after the powerful opiates I
have been obliged to use. It is more painful for you to see than for her
to bear, I believe. But, I think, if we could get a water-bed it might
be a good thing. Not but what she will be better to-morrow; pretty much
like herself as she was before this attack. Still, I should like her to
have a water-bed. Mrs. Thornton has one, I know. I’ll try and call there
this afternoon. Stay,” said he, his eye catching on Margaret’s face,
blanched with watching in a sick room, “I’m not sure whether I can go;
I’ve a long round to take. It would do you no harm to have a brisk walk
to Marlborough Street, and ask Mrs. Thornton if she can spare it.”

“Certainly,” said Margaret. “I could go while mamma is asleep this
afternoon. I’m sure Mrs. Thornton would lend it to us.”

Dr. Donaldson’s experience told him rightly. Mrs. Hale seemed to shake
off the consequences of her attack, and looked brighter and better this
afternoon than Margaret had ever hoped to see her again. Her daughter
left her after dinner, sitting in her easy chair, with her hand lying in
her husband’s, who looked more worn and suffering than she by far.
Still, he could smile now—rather slowly, rather faintly, it is true;
but a day or two before, Margaret never thought to see him smile again.

It was about two miles from their house in Crampton Crescent to
Marlborough Street. It was too hot to walk very quickly. An August sun
beat straight down into the street at three o’clock in the afternoon.
Margaret went along, without noticing anything very different from usual
in the first mile and a half of her journey; she was absorbed in her own
thoughts, and had learnt by this time to thread her way through the
irregular stream of human beings that flowed through Milton streets.
But, by and by, she was struck with an unusual heaving among the mass of
people in the crowded road on which she was entering. They did not
appear to be moving on, so much as talking, and listening, and buzzing
with excitement without much stirring from the spot where they might
happen to be. Still, as they made way for her, and, wrapt up in the
purpose of her errand, and the necessities that suggested it, she was
less quick of observation than she might have been, if her mind had been
at ease. She had got into Marlborough Street before the full conviction
forced itself upon her, that there was a restless, oppressive sense of
irritation abroad among the people; a thunderous atmosphere, morally as
well as physically, around her. From every narrow lane opening out on
Marlborough Street came up a low distant roar, as of myriads of fierce
indignant voices. The inhabitants of each poor squalid dwelling were
gathered round the doors and windows, if indeed they were not actually
standing in the middle of the narrow ways—all with looks intent towards
one point. Marlborough Street itself was the focus of all those human
eyes, that betrayed intensest interest of various kinds; some fierce
with anger, some lowering with relentless threats! some dilated with
fear, or imploring entreaty; and as Margaret reached the small
side-entrance by the folding doors, in the great dead wall of
Marlborough mill-yard, and waited the porter’s answer to the bell, she
looked round and heard the first long far-off roll of the tempest;—saw
the first slow-surging wave of the dark crowd come, with its threatening
crest, tumble over, and retreat, at the far end of the street, which a
moment ago seemed so full of repressed noise, but which now was
ominously still; all these circumstances forced themselves on Margaret’s
notice, but did not sink down into her pre-occupied heart. She did not
know what they meant—what was their deep significance; while she did
know, did feel the keen sharp pressure of the knife that was soon to
stab her through and through by leaving her motherless. She was trying
to realise that, in order that, when it came, she might be ready to
comfort her father.

The porter opened the door cautiously, not nearly wide enough to admit
her.

“It’s you, is it, ma’am?” said he, drawing a long breath, and widening
the entrance, but still not opening it fully. Margaret went in. He
hastily bolted it behind her.

“Th’ folk are all coming up here, I reckon?” asked he.

“I don’t know. Something unusual seemed going on; but this street is
quite empty, I think.”

She went across the yard and put up the steps to the house door. There
was no near sound,—no steam engine at work with beat and pant,—no
click of machinery, no mingling and clashing of many sharp voices; but
far away, the ominous gathering roar, deep-clamouring.




CHAPTER XXII.

A BLOW AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.

    “But work grew scarce, while bread grew dear,
       And wages lessened, too;
     For Irish hordes were bidders here,
       Our half-paid work to do.”
                       CORN LAW RHYMES.


Margaret was shown into the drawing-room. It had returned into its
normal state of bag and covering. The windows were half open because of
the heat, and the Venetian blinds covered the glass,—so that a gray
grim light, reflected from the pavement below, threw all the shadows
wrong, and combined with the green-tinged upper light to make even
Margaret’s own face, as she caught it in the mirrors, look ghastly and
wan. She sat and waited; no one came. Every now and then, the wind
seemed to bear the distant multitudinous sound nearer; and yet there was
no wind! It died away into profound stillness between whiles.

Fanny came in at last.

“Mamma will come directly, Miss Hale. She desired me to apologise to you
as it is. Perhaps you know my brother has imported hands from Ireland,
and it has irritated the Milton people excessively—as if he hadn’t a
right to get labour where he could; and the stupid wretches here
wouldn’t work for him; and now they’ve frightened these poor Irish
starvelings so with their threats, that we daren’t let them out. You may
see them huddled in that top room in the mill,—and they’re to sleep
there, to keep them safe from those brutes, who will neither work or let
them work. And mamma is seeing about their food, and John is speaking to
them, for some of the women are crying to go back. Ah! here’s mamma!”

Mrs. Thornton came in with a look of black sternness on her face, which
made Margaret feel she had arrived at a bad time to trouble her with her
request. However, it was only in compliance with Mrs. Thornton’s
expressed desire, that she would ask for whatever they might want in the
progress of her mother’s illness. Mrs. Thornton’s brow contracted, and
her mouth grew set, while Margaret spoke with gentle modesty of her
mother’s restlessness, and Dr. Donaldson’s wish that she should have the
relief of a water-bed. She ceased. Mrs. Thornton did not reply
immediately. Then she started up and exclaimed—

“They’re at the gates! Call John, Fanny,—call him in from the mill!
They’re at the gates! They’ll batter them in! Call John, I say!”

And simultaneously, the gathering tramp—to which she had been
listening, instead of heeding Margaret’s words—was heard just right
outside the wall, and an increasing din of angry voices raged behind the
wooden barrier, which shook as if the unseen maddened crowd made
battering rams of their bodies, and retreated a short space only to come
with more united steady impetus against it, till their great beats made
the strong gates quiver, like reeds before the wind.

The women gathered round the windows, fascinated to look on the scene
which terrified them. Mrs. Thornton, the women-servants, Margaret,—all
were there. Fanny had returned, screaming upstairs as if pursued at
every step, and had thrown herself in hysterical sobbing on the sofa.
Mrs. Thornton watched for her son, who was still in the mill. He came
out, looked up at them—the pale cluster of faces—and smiled good
courage to them, before he locked the factory door. Then he called to
one of the women to come down and undo his own door, which Fanny had
fastened behind her in her mad flight. Mrs. Thornton herself went. And
the sound of his well-known and commanding voice, seemed to have been
like the taste of blood to the infuriated multitude outside. Hitherto
they had been voiceless, wordless, needing all their breath for their
hard-laboured efforts to break down the gates. But now, hearing him
speak inside, they set up such a fierce, unearthly groan, that even Mrs.
Thornton was white with fear as she preceded him into the room. He came
in a little flushed, but his eyes gleamed, as in answer to the
trumpet-call of danger, and with a proud look of defiance on his face,
that made him a noble, if not a handsome man. Margaret had always
dreaded lest her courage should fail her in any emergency, and she
should be proved to be, what she dreaded lest she was—a coward. But
now, in this real great time of reasonable fear and nearness of terror,
she forgot herself, and felt only an intense sympathy—intense to
painfulness—in the interests of the moment.

Mr. Thornton came frankly forwards:

“I’m sorry, Miss Hale, you have visited us at this unfortunate moment,
when, I fear, you may be involved in whatever risk we have to bear.
Mother! hadn’t you better go into the back rooms? I’m not sure whether
they may not have made their way from Pinner’s Lane into the
stable-yard; but if not, you will be safer there than here. Go, Jane!”
continued he, addressing the upper-servant. And she went, followed by
the others.

“I stop here!” said his mother. “Where you are, there I stay.” And
indeed, retreat into the back rooms was of no avail; the crowd had
surrounded the outbuildings at the rear, and were sending forth their
awful threatening roar behind. The servants retreated into the garrets,
with many a cry and shriek. Mr. Thornton smiled scornfully as he heard
them. He glanced at Margaret, standing all by herself at the window
nearest the factory. Her eyes glittered, her colour was deepened on
cheek and lip. As if she felt his look, she turned to him and asked a
question that had been for some time in her mind:

“Where are the poor imported workpeople? In the factory there?”

“Yes! I left them cowed up in a small room, at the head of a back flight
of stairs; bidding them run all risks, and escape down there, if they
heard any attack made on the mill doors. But it is not them—it is me
they want.”

“When can the soldiers be here?” asked his mother, in a low but not
unsteady voice.

He took out his watch with the same steady composure with which he did
everything. He made some little calculation:—

“Supposing Williams got straight off when I told him, and hadn’t to
dodge about amongst them—it must be twenty minutes yet.”

“Twenty minutes!” said his mother, for the first time showing her terror
in the tones of her voice.

“Shut down the windows instantly, mother,” exclaimed he: “the gates
won’t bear such another shock. Shut down that window, Miss Hale.”

Margaret shut down her window, and then went to assist Mrs. Thornton’s
trembling fingers.

From some cause or other, there was a pause of several minutes in the
unseen street. Mrs. Thornton looked with wild anxiety at her son’s
countenance, as if to gain the interpretation of the sudden stillness
from him. His face was set into rigid lines of contemptuous defiance;
neither hope nor fear could be read there.

Fanny raised herself up:

“Are they gone?” asked she, in a whisper.

“Gone!” replied he. “Listen!”

She did listen; they all could hear the one great straining breath; the
creak of wood slowly yielding; the wrench of iron; the mighty fall of
the ponderous gates. Fanny stood up tottering—made a step or two
towards her mother, and fell forwards into her arms in a fainting fit.
Mrs. Thornton lifted her up with a strength that was as much that of the
will as of the body, and carried her away.

“Thank God!” said Mr. Thornton, as he watched her out. “Had you not
better go upstairs, Miss Hale?”

Margaret’s lips formed a “No!”—but he could not hear her speak, for the
tramp of innumerable steps right under the very wall of the house, and
the fierce growl of low deep angry voices that had a ferocious murmur of
satisfaction in them, more dreadful than their baffled cries not many
minutes before.

“Never mind!” said he, thinking to encourage her. “I am very sorry that
you should have been entrapped into all this alarm; but it cannot last
long now; a few minutes more, and the soldiers will be here.”

“Oh, God!” cried Margaret, suddenly; “there is Boucher. I know his face,
though he is livid with rage,—he is fighting to get to the front—look!
look!”

“Who is Boucher?” asked Mr. Thornton coolly, and coming close to the
window to discover the man in whom Margaret took such an interest. As
soon as they saw Mr. Thornton, they set up a yell, to call it not human
is nothing,—it was as the demoniac desire of some terrible wild beast
for the food that is withheld from his ravening. Even he drew back for a
moment, dismayed at the intensity of hatred he had provoked.

“Let them yell!” said he. “In five minutes more—. I only hope my poor
Irishmen are not terrified out of their wits by such a fiendlike noise.
Keep up your courage for five minutes, Miss Hale.”

“Don’t be afraid for me,” she said hastily. “But what in five minutes?
Can you do nothing to soothe these poor creatures? It is awful to see
them.”

“The soldiers will be here directly, and that will bring them to
reason.”

“To reason!” said Margaret, quickly. “What kind of reason?”

“The only reason that does with men that make themselves into wild
beasts. By heaven! they’ve turned to the mill-door!”

“Mr. Thornton,” said Margaret, shaking all over with her passion, “go
down this instant, if you are not a coward. Go down and face them like a
man. Save these poor strangers, whom you have decoyed here. Speak to
your workmen as if they were human beings. Speak to them kindly. Don’t
let the soldiers come in and cut down poor creatures who are driven mad.
I see one there who is. If you have any courage or noble quality in you,
go out and speak to them, man to man!”

He turned and looked at her while she spoke. A dark cloud came over his
face while he listened. He set his teeth as he heard her words.

“I will go. Perhaps I may ask you to accompany me downstairs, and bar
the door behind me; my mother and sister will need that protection.”

“Oh! Mr. Thornton! I do not know—I may be wrong—only—”

But he was gone; he was downstairs in the hall; he had unbarred the
front door; all she could do, was to follow him quickly, and fasten it
behind him, and clamber up the stairs again with a sick heart and a
dizzy head. Again she took her place by the farthest window. He was on
the steps below; she saw that by the direction of a thousand angry eyes;
but she could neither see nor hear anything save the savage satisfaction
of the rolling angry murmur. See threw the window wide open. Many in the
crowd were mere boys; cruel and thoughtless,—cruel because they were
thoughtless; some were men, gaunt as wolves, and mad for prey. She knew
how it was; they were like Boucher,—with starving children at
home—relying on ultimate success in their efforts to get higher wages,
and enraged beyond measure at discovering that Irishmen were to be
brought in to rob their little ones of bread. Margaret knew it all; she
read it in Boucher’s face, forlornly desperate and livid with rage. If
Mr. Thornton would but say something to them—let them hear his voice
only—it seemed as if it would be better than this wild beating and
raging against the stony silence that vouchsafed them no word, even of
anger or reproach. But perhaps he was speaking now; there was a
momentary hush of their noise, inarticulate as that of a troop of
animals. She tore her bonnet off, and bent forward to hear. She could
only see; for if Mr. Thornton had indeed made the attempt to speak, the
momentary instinct to listen to him was past and gone, and the people
were raging worse than ever. He stood with his arms folded; still as a
statue; his face pale with repressed excitement. They were trying to
intimidate him—to make him flinch; each was urging the other on to some
immediate act of personal violence. Margaret felt intuitively, that in
an instant all would be uproar; the first touch would cause an
explosion, in which, among such hundreds of infuriated men and reckless
boys, even Mr. Thornton’s life would be unsafe,—that in another instant
the stormy passions would have passed their bounds, and swept away all
barriers of reason, or apprehension of consequence. Even while she
looked, she saw lads in the background stooping to take off their heavy
wooden clogs—the readiest missile they could find; she saw it was the
spark to the gunpowder, and, with a cry, which no one heard, she rushed
out of the room, down stairs,—she had lifted the great iron bar of the
door with an imperious force—had thrown the door open wide—and was
there, in face of that angry sea of men, her eyes smiting them with
flaming arrows of reproach. The clogs were arrested in the hands that
held them—the countenances, so fell not a moment before, now looked
irresolute, and as if asking what this meant. For she stood between them
and their enemy. She could not speak, but held out her arms towards them
till she could recover breath.

“Oh, do not use violence! He is one man, and you are many”; but her
words died away, for there was no tone in her voice; it was but a hoarse
whisper. Mr. Thornton stood a little on one side; he had moved away from
behind her, as if jealous of anything that should come between him and
danger.

“Go!” said she, once more (and now her voice was like a cry). “The
soldiers are sent for—are coming. Go peaceably. Go away. You shall have
relief from your complaints, whatever they are.”

“Shall them Irish blackguards be packed back again?” asked one from out
the crowd, with fierce threatening in his voice.

“Never, for your bidding!” exclaimed Mr. Thornton. And instantly the
storm broke. The hootings rose and filled the air,—but Margaret did not
hear them. Her eye was on the group of lads who had armed themselves
with their clogs some time before. She saw their gesture—she knew its
meaning—she read their aim. Another moment, and Mr. Thornton might be
smitten down,—he whom she had urged and goaded to come to this
perilous place. She only thought how she could save him. She threw her
arms around him; she made her body into a shield from the fierce people
beyond. Still, with his arms folded, he shook her off.

“Go away,” said he, in his deep voice. “This is no place for you.”

“It is,” said she. “You did not see what I saw.” If she thought her sex
would be a protection,—if, with shrinking eyes she had turned away from
the terrible anger of these men, in any hope that ere she looked again
they would have paused and reflected, and slunk away, and vanished,—she
was wrong. Their reckless passion had carried them too far to stop—at
least had carried some of them too far; for it is always the savage
lads, with their love of cruel excitement, who head the riot—reckless
to what bloodshed it may lead. A clog whizzed through the air.
Margaret’s fascinated eyes watched its progress; it missed its aim, and
she turned sick with affright, but changed not her position, only hid
her face on Mr. Thornton’s arm. Then she turned and spoke again:

“For God’s sake! do not damage your cause by this violence. You do not
know what you are doing.” She strove to make her words distinct.

A sharp pebble flew by her, grazing forehead and cheek, and drawing a
blinding sheet of light before her eyes. She lay like one dead on Mr.
Thornton’s shoulder. Then he unfolded his arms, and held her encircled
in one for an instant:

“You do well!” said he. “You come to oust the innocent stranger. You
fall—you hundreds—on one man; and when a woman comes before you, to
ask you for your own sakes to be reasonable creatures, your cowardly
wrath falls upon her! You do well!” They were silent while he spoke.
They were watching, open-eyed and open-mouthed, the thread of dark-red
blood which wakened them up from their trance of passion. Those nearest
the gate stole out ashamed; there was a movement through all the
crowd—a retreating movement. Only one voice called out:

“Th’ stone was meant for thee; but thou wert sheltered behind a woman!”

Mr. Thornton quivered with rage. The blood-flowing had made Margaret
conscious—dimly, vaguely conscious. He placed her gently on the
door-step, her head leaning against the frame.

“Can you rest there?” he asked. But without waiting for her answer, he
went slowly down the steps right into the middle of the crowd. “Now kill
me, if it is your brutal will. There is no woman to shield me here. You
may beat me to death—you will never move me from what I have determined
upon—not you!” He stood amongst them with his arms folded, in precisely
the same attitude as he had been in on the steps.

But the retrograde movement towards the gate had begun—as
unreasoningly, perhaps as blindly, as the simultaneous anger. Or,
perhaps, the idea of the approach of the soldiers, and the sight of that
pale, upturned face, with closed eyes, still and sad as marble, though
the tears welled out of the long entanglement of eyelashes, and dropped
down; and, heavier, slower plash than even tears, came the drip of blood
from her wound. Even the most desperate—Boucher himself—drew back,
faltered away, scowled, and finally went off, muttering curses on the
master, who stood in his unchanging attitude, looking after their
retreat with defiant eyes. The moment that retreat had changed into a
flight (as it was sure from its very character to do), he darted up the
steps to Margaret.

She tried to rise without his help.

“It is nothing,” she said, with a sickly smile. “The skin is grazed, and
I was stunned at the moment. Oh, I am so thankful they are gone!” And
she cried without restraint.

He could not sympathise with her. His anger had not abated; it was
rising the more as his sense of immediate danger was passing away. The
distant clank of the soldiers was heard: just five minutes too late to
make this vanished mob feel the power of authority and order. He hoped
they would see the troops, and be quelled by the thought of their narrow
escape. While these thoughts crossed his mind, Margaret clung to the
doorpost to steady herself: but a film came over her eyes—he was only
just in time to catch her. “Mother—mother!” cried he; “Come down—they
are gone, and Miss Hale is hurt!” He bore her into the dining-room, and
laid her on the sofa there; laid her down softly, and looking on her
pure white face, the sense of what she was to him came upon him so
keenly that he spoke it out in his pain:

“Oh, my Margaret—my Margaret! no one can tell what you are to me!
Dead—cold as you lie there, you are the only woman I ever loved! Oh,
Margaret—Margaret!”

Inarticulately as he spoke, kneeling by her, and rather moaning than
saying the words, he started up, ashamed of himself, as his mother came
in. She saw nothing, but her son a little paler, a little sterner than
usual.

“Miss Hale is hurt, mother. A stone has grazed her temple. She has lost
a good deal of blood, I’m afraid.”

“She looks very seriously hurt,—I could almost fancy her dead,” said
Mrs. Thornton, a good deal alarmed.

“It is only a fainting-fit. She has spoken to me since.” But all the
blood in his body seemed to rush inwards to his heart as he spoke, and
he absolutely trembled.

“Go and call Jane,—she can find me the things I want; and do you go to
your Irish people, who are crying and shouting as if they were mad with
fright.”

He went. He went away as if weights were tied to every limb that bore
him from her. He called Jane; he called his sister. She should have all
womanly care, all gentle tendance. But every pulse beat in him as he
remembered how she had come down and placed herself in foremost
danger—could it be to save him? At the time, he had pushed her aside,
and spoken gruffly; he had seen nothing but the unnecessary danger she
had placed herself in. He went to his Irish people, with every nerve in
his body thrilling at the thought of her, and found it difficult to
understand enough of what they were saying to soothe and comfort away
their fears. There, they declared, they would not stop; they claimed to
be sent back.

And so he had to think, and talk, and reason.

Mrs. Thornton bathed Margaret’s temples with eau de Cologne. As the
spirit touched the wound, which till then neither Mrs. Thornton nor Jane
had perceived, Margaret opened her eyes; but it was evident she did not
know where she was, nor who they were. The dark circles deepened, the
lips quivered and contracted, and she became insensible once more.

“She has had a terrible blow,” said Mrs. Thornton. “Is there any one who
will go for a doctor?”

“Not me, ma’am, if you please,” said Jane, shrinking back. “Them rabble
may be all about; I don’t think the cut is so deep, ma’am, as it looks.”

“I will not run the chance. She was hurt in our house. If you are a
coward, Jane, I am not. I will go.”

“Pray, ma’am, let me send one of the police. There’s ever so many come
up, and soldiers too.”

“And yet you’re afraid to go! I will not have their time taken up with
our errands. They’ll have enough to do to catch some of the mob. You
will not be afraid to stop in this house,” she asked contemptuously,
“and go on bathing Miss Hale’s forehead, shall you? I shall not be ten
minutes away.”

“Couldn’t Hannah go, ma’am?”

“Why Hannah? Why any but you? No, Jane, if you don’t go, I do.”

Mrs. Thornton went first to the room in which she had left Fanny
stretched on the bed. She started up as her mother entered.

“Oh, mamma, how you terrified me! I thought you were a man that had got
into the house.”

“Nonsense! The men are all gone away. There are soldiers all round the
place, seeking for their work now it is too late. Miss Hale is lying on
the dining-room sofa badly hurt. I am going for the doctor.”

“Oh! don’t, mamma! they’ll murder you.” She clung to her mother’s gown.
Mrs. Thornton wrenched it away with no gentle hand.

“Find me some one else to go; but that girl must not bleed to death.”

“Bleed! oh, how horrid! How has she got hurt?”

“I don’t know,—I have no time to ask. Go down to her, Fanny, and do try
to make yourself of use. Jane is with her; and I trust it looks worse
than it is. Jane has refused to leave the house, cowardly woman! And I
won’t put myself in the way of any more refusals from my servants, so I
am going myself.”

“Oh, dear, dear!” said Fanny, crying, and preparing to go down rather
than be left alone, with the thought of wounds and bloodshed in the very
house.

“Oh, Jane!” said she, creeping into the dining-room, “What is the
matter? How white she looks! How did she get hurt? Did they throw stones
into the drawing-room?”

Margaret did indeed look white and wan, although her senses were
beginning to return to her. But the sickly daze of the swoon made her
still miserably faint. She was conscious of movement around her, and of
refreshment from the eau de Cologne, and a craving for the bathing to go
on without intermission; but when they stopped to talk, she could no
more have opened her eyes, or spoken to ask for more bathing, than the
people who lie in death-like trance can move, or utter sound, to arrest
the awful preparations for their burial, while they are yet fully aware,
not merely of the actions of those around them, but of the idea that is
the motive for such actions.

Jane paused in her bathing, to reply to Miss Thornton’s question.

“She’d have been safe enough, miss, if she’d stayed in the drawing-room,
or come up to us; we were in the front garret, and could see it all, out
of harm’s way.”

“Where was she then?” said Fanny, drawing nearer by slow degrees, as she
became accustomed to the sight of Margaret’s pale face.

“Just before the front door—with master!” said Jane, significantly.

“With John! with my brother! How did she get there?”

“Nay, miss, that’s not for me to say,” answered Jane, with a slight toss
of her head. “Sarah did——”

“Sarah what?” said Fanny, with impatient curiosity.

Jane resumed her bathing, as if what Sarah did or said was not exactly
the thing she liked to repeat.

“Sarah what?” asked Fanny, sharply. “Don’t speak in these half
sentences, or I can’t understand you.”

“Well, miss, since you will have it—Sarah, you see, was in the best
place for seeing, being at the right-hand window; and she says, and said
at the very time too, that she saw Miss Hale with her arms about
master’s neck, hugging him before all the people.”

“I don’t believe it,” said Fanny. “I know she cares for my brother; any
one can see that; and I dare say, she’d give her eyes if he’d marry
her,—which he never will, I can tell her. But I don’t believe she’d be
so bold and forward as to put her arms round his neck.”

“Poor young lady! she’s paid for it dearly if she did. It’s my belief,
that the blow has given her such an ascendancy of blood to the head as
she’ll never get the better from. She looks like a corpse now.”

“Oh, I wish mamma would come!” said Fanny, wringing her hands. “I never
was in the room with a dead person before.”

“Stay, miss! She’s not dead: her eye-lids are quivering, and here’s wet
tears a-coming down her cheeks. Speak to her, Miss Fanny!”

“Are you better now?” asked Fanny, in a quavering voice.

No answer; no sign of recognition; but a faint pink colour returned to
her lips, although the rest of her face was ashen pale.

Mrs. Thornton came hurriedly in, with the nearest surgeon she could
find.

“How is she? Are you better, my dear?” as Margaret opened her filmy
eyes, and gazed dreamily at her. “Here is Mr. Lowe come to see you.”

Mrs. Thornton spoke loudly and distinctly, as to a deaf person. Margaret
tried to rise, and drew her ruffled, luxuriant hair instinctively over
the cut.

“I am better now,” said she, in a very low, faint voice. “I was a little
sick.”

She let him take her hand and feel her pulse. The bright colour came for
a moment into her face, when he asked to examine the wound in her
forehead; and she glanced up at Jane, as if shrinking from her
inspection more than from the doctor’s.

“It is not much, I think. I am better now. I must go home.”

“Not until I have applied some strips of plaster, and you have rested a
little.”

She sat down hastily, without another word, and allowed it to be bound
up.

“Now, if you please,” said she, “I must go. Mamma will not see it, I
think. It is under the hair, is it not?”

“Quite; no one could tell.”

“But you must not go,” said Mrs. Thornton, impatiently. “You are not fit
to go.”

“I must,” said Margaret, decidedly. “Think of mamma. If they should
hear—— Besides, I must go,” said she, vehemently. “I cannot stay here.
May I ask for a cab?”

“You are quite flushed and feverish,” observed Mr. Lowe.

“It is only with being here, when I do so want to go. The air—getting
away, would do me more good than anything,” pleaded she.

“I really believe it is as she says,” Mr. Lowe replied. “If her mother
is so ill as you told me on the way here, it may be very serious if she
hears of this riot, and does not see her daughter back at the time she
expects. The injury is not deep. I will fetch a cab, if your servants
are still afraid to go out.”

“Oh, thank you!” said Margaret. “It will do me more good than anything.
It is the air of this room that makes me feel so miserable.”

She leant back on the sofa, and closed her eyes. Fanny beckoned her
mother out of the room, and told her something that made her equally
anxious with Margaret for the departure of the latter. Not that she
fully believed Fanny’s statement; but she credited enough to make her
manner to Margaret appear very much constrained, at wishing her
good-bye.

Mr. Lowe returned in the cab.

“If you will allow me, I will see you home, Miss Hale. The streets are
not very quiet yet.”

Margaret’s thoughts were quite alive enough to the present to make her
desirous of getting rid of both Mr. Lowe and the cab before she reached
Crampton Crescent, for fear of alarming her father and mother. Beyond
that one aim she would not look. That ugly dream of insolent words
spoken about herself, could never be forgotten—but could be put aside
till she was stronger—for, oh! she was very weak; and her mind sought
for some present fact to steady itself upon, and keep it from utterly
losing consciousness in another hideous, sickly swoon.




CHAPTER XXIII.

MISTAKES.

    “Which when his mother saw, she in her mind
    Was troubled sore, he wist well what to ween.”
              SPENSER.


Margaret had not been gone five minutes when Mr. Thornton came in, his
face all a-glow.

“I could not come sooner: the superintendent would—— Where is she?” He
looked round the dining-room, and then almost fiercely at his mother,
who was quietly re-arranging the disturbed furniture, and did not
instantly reply. “Where is Miss Hale?” asked he again.

“Gone home,” said she, rather shortly.

“Gone home!”

“Yes. She was a great deal better. Indeed, I don’t believe it was so
very much of a hurt; only some people faint at the least thing.”

“I am sorry she has gone home,” said he, walking uneasily about. “She
could not have been fit for it.”

“She said she was; and Mr. Lowe said she was. I went for him myself.”

“Thank you, mother.” He stopped, and partly held out his hand to give
her a grateful shake. But she did not notice the movement.

“What have you done with your Irish people?”

“Sent to the Dragon, for a good meal for them, poor wretches. And then,
luckily, I caught Father Grady, and I’ve asked him in to speak to them,
and dissuade them from going off in a body. How did Miss Hale go home?
I’m sure she could not walk.”

“She had a cab. Everything was done properly, even to the paying. Let us
talk of something else. She has caused disturbance enough.”

“I don’t know where I should have been but for her.”

“Are you become so helpless as to have to be defended by a girl?” asked
Mrs. Thornton scornfully.

He reddened. “Not many girls would have taken the blows on herself
which were meant for me;—meant with right down goodwill, too.”

“A girl in love will do a good deal,” replied Mrs. Thornton, shortly.

“Mother!” He made a step forwards; stood still; heaved with passion.

She was a little startled at the evident force he used to keep himself
calm. She was not sure of the nature of the emotions she had provoked.
It was only their violence that was clear. Was it anger? His eyes
glowed, his figure was dilated, his breath came thick and fast. It was a
mixture of joy, of anger, of pride, of glad surprise, of panting doubt;
but she could not read it. Still it made her uneasy,—as the presence of
all strong feeling, of which the cause is not fully understood or
sympathised in, always has this effect. She went to the side-board,
opened a drawer, and took out a duster, which she kept there for any
occasional purpose. She had seen a drop of eau de Cologne on the
polished arm of the sofa, and instinctively sought to wipe it off. But
she kept her back turned to her son much longer than was necessary; and
when she spoke, her voice seemed unusual and constrained.

“You have taken some steps about the rioters, I suppose? You don’t
apprehend anymore violence, do you? Where were the police? Never at hand
when they’re wanted!”

“On the contrary, I saw three or four of them, when the gates gave way,
struggling and beating about in fine fashion; and more came running up
just when the yard was clearing. I might have given some of the fellows
in charge then, if I had had my wits about me. But there will be no
difficulty, plenty of people can identify them.”

“But won’t they come back to-night?”

“I’m going to see about a sufficient guard for the premises. I have
appointed to meet Captain Hanbury in half an hour at the station.”

“You must have some tea first.”

“Tea! Yes, I suppose I must. It’s half-past six, and I may be out for
some time. Don’t sit up for me, mother.”

“You expect me to go to bed before I have seen you safe, do you?”

“Well, perhaps not.” He hesitated for a moment. “But if I’ve time, I
shall go round by Crampton, after I’ve arranged with the police and seen
Hamper and Clarkson.” Their eyes met; they looked at each other intently
for a minute. Then she asked:

“Why are you going round by Crampton?”

“To ask after Miss Hale.”

“I will send. Williams must take the water-bed she came to ask for. He
shall inquire how she is.”

“I must go myself.”

“Not merely to ask how Miss Hale is?”

“No, not merely for that. I want to thank her for the way in which she
stood between me and the mob.”

“What made you go down at all? It was putting your head into the lion’s
mouth!”

He glanced sharply at her; saw that she did not know what had passed
between him and Margaret in the drawing-room: and replied by another
question:

“Shall you be afraid to be left without me, until I can get some of the
police; or had we better send Williams for them now, and they could be
here by the time we have done tea? There’s no time to be lost. I must be
off in a quarter of an hour.”

Mrs. Thornton left the room. Her servants wondered at her directions,
usually so sharply-cut and decided, now confused and uncertain. Mr.
Thornton remained in the dining-room, trying to think of the business he
had to do at the police-office, and in reality thinking of Margaret.
Everything seemed dim and vague beyond—behind—besides the touch of her
arms round his neck—the soft clinging which made the dark colour come
and go in his cheek as he thought of it.

The tea would have been very silent, but for Fanny’s perpetual
description of her own feelings; how she had been alarmed—and then
thought they were gone—and then felt sick and faint and trembling in
every limb.

“There, that’s enough,” said her brother, rising from the table. “The
reality was enough for me.” He was going to leave the room, when his
mother stopped him with her hand upon his arm.

“You will come back here before you go to the Hales’,” said she, in a
low, anxious voice.

“I know what I know,” said Fanny to herself.

“Why? Will it be too late to disturb them?”

“John, come back to me for this one evening. It will be late for Mrs.
Hale. But that is not it. To-morrow, you will—— Come back to-night,
John!” She had seldom pleaded with her son at all—she was too proud for
that; but she had never pleaded in vain.

“I will return straight here after I have done my business. You will be
sure to enquire after them?—after her?”

Mrs. Thornton was by no means a talkative companion to Fanny, nor yet a
good listener while her son was absent. But on his return, her eyes and
ears were keen to see and to listen to all the details which he could
give, as to the steps he had taken to secure himself, and those whom he
chose to employ, from any repetition of the day’s outrages. He clearly
saw his object. Punishment and suffering were the natural consequences
to those who had taken part in the riot. All that was necessary, in
order that property should be protected, and that the will of the
proprietor might cut to his end, clean and sharp as a sword.

“Mother! You know what I have got to say to Miss Hale, to-morrow?”

The question came upon her suddenly, during a pause in which she, at
least, had forgotten Margaret.

She looked up at him.

“Yes! I do. You can hardly do otherwise.”

“Do otherwise! I don’t understand you.”

“I mean that, after allowing her feelings so to overcome her, I consider
you bound in honour—”

“Bound in honour,” said he scornfully. “I’m afraid honour has nothing to
do with it. ‘Her feelings overcome her!’ What feelings do you mean?”

“Nay, John, there is no need to be angry. Did she not rush down and
cling to you to save you from danger?”

“She did!” said he. “But, mother,” continued he, stopping short in his
walk right in front of her. “I dare not hope. I never was faint-hearted
before; but I cannot believe such a creature cares for me.”

“Don’t be foolish, John. Such a creature! Why, she might be a duke’s
daughter, to hear you speak. And what proof more would you have, I
wonder, of her caring for you? I can believe she has had a struggle with
her aristocratic way of viewing things; but I like her the better for
seeing clearly at last. It is a good deal for me to say,” said Mrs.
Thornton, smiling slowly, while the tears stood in her eyes; “for after
to-night, I stand second. It was to have you to myself, all to myself, a
few hours longer, that I begged you not to go till to-morrow.”

“Dearest mother!” (Still love is selfish, and in an instant he reverted
to his own hopes and fears in a way that drew the cold creeping shadow
over Mrs. Thornton’s heart.) “But I know she does not care for me. I
shall put myself at her feet—I must. If it were but one chance in a
thousand—or a million—I should do it.”

“Don’t fear!” said his mother, crushing down her own personal
mortification at the little notice he had taken of the rare ebullition
of her maternal feelings—of the pang of jealousy that betrayed the
intensity of her disregarded love. “Don’t be afraid,” she said, coldly.
“As far as love may go she may be worthy of you. It must have taken a
good deal to overcome her pride. Don’t be afraid, John,” said she,
kissing him, as she wished him good-night. And she went slowly and
majestically out of the room. But when she got into her own, she locked
the door, and sate down to cry unwonted tears.

       *       *       *       *       *

Margaret entered the room (where her father and mother still sat,
holding low conversation together), looking very pale and white. She
came close up to them before she could trust herself to speak.

“Mrs. Thornton will send the water-bed, mamma.”

“Dear, how tired you look! Is it very hot, Margaret?”

“Very hot, and the streets are rather rough with the strike.”

Margaret’s colour came back vivid and bright as ever; but it faded away
instantly.

“Here has been a message from Bessy Higgins, asking you to go to her,”
said Mrs. Hale. “But I’m sure you look too tired.”

“Yes!” said Margaret. “I am tired, I cannot go.”

She was very silent and trembling while she made tea. She was thankful
to see her father so much occupied with her mother as not to notice her
looks. Even after her mother went to bed, he was not content to be
absent from her, but undertook to read her to sleep. Margaret was alone.

“Now I will think of it—now I will remember it all. I could not
before—I dared not.” She sat still in her chair, her hands clasped on
her knees, her lips compressed, her eyes fixed as one who sees a vision.
She drew a deep breath.

“I, who hate scenes—I, who have despised people for showing
emotion—who have thought them wanting in self-control—I went down and
must needs throw myself into the melée, like a romantic fool! Did I do
any good? They would have gone away without me, I dare say.” But this
was overleaping the rational conclusion,—as in an instant her
well-poised judgment felt. “No, perhaps they would not. I did some good.
But what possessed me to defend that man as if he were a helpless child!
Ah!” said she, clenching her hands together, “it is no wonder those
people thought I was in love with him, after disgracing myself in that
way. I in love—and with him too!” Her pale cheeks suddenly became one
flame of fire; and she covered her face with her hands. When she took
them away, her palms were wet with scalding tears.

“Oh how low I am fallen that they should say that of me! I could not
have been so brave for any one else, just because he was so utterly
indifferent to me—if, indeed, I do not positively dislike him. It made
me the more anxious that there should be fair play on each side; and I
could see what fair play was. It was not fair,” said she vehemently,
“that he should stand there—sheltered, awaiting the soldiers, who might
catch those poor maddened creatures as in a trap—without an effort on
his part, to bring them to reason. And it was worse than unfair for them
to set on him as they threatened. I would do it again, let who will say
what they like of me. If I saved one blow, one cruel, angry action that
might otherwise have been committed, I did a woman’s work. Let them
insult my maiden pride as they will—I walk pure before God!”

She looked up, and a noble peace seemed to descend and calm her face,
till it was “stiller than chiselled marble.”

Dixon came in:

“If you please, Miss Margaret, here’s the water-bed from Mrs.
Thornton’s. It’s too late for to-night, I’m afraid, for missus is nearly
asleep: but it will do nicely for to-morrow.”

“Very,” said Margaret. “You must send our best thanks.”

Dixon left the room for a moment.

“If you please, Miss Margaret, he says he’s to ask particular how you
are. I think he must mean missus; but he says his last words were, to
ask how Miss Hale was.”

“Me!” said Margaret, drawing herself up. “I am quite well. Tell him I am
perfectly well.” But her complexion was as deadly white as her
handkerchief; and her head ached intensely.

Mr. Hale now came in. He had left his sleeping wife; and wanted, as
Margaret saw, to be amused and interested by something that she was to
tell him. With sweet patience did she bear her pain, without a word of
complaint; and rummaged up numberless small subjects for
conversation—all except the riot, and that she never named once. It
turned her sick to think of it.

“Good-night, Margaret. I have every chance of a good night myself, and
you are looking very pale with your watching. I shall call Dixon if your
mother needs anything. Do you go to bed and sleep like a top; for I’m
sure you need it, poor child!”

“Good-night, papa!”

She let her colour go—the false smile fade away—the eyes grow dull
with heavy pain. She released her strong will from its laborious task.
Till morning she might feel ill and weary.

She lay down and never stirred. To move hand or foot, or even so much as
one finger, would have been beyond the powers of either volition or
motion. She was so tired, so stunned, that she thought she never slept
at all; her feverish thoughts passed and repassed the boundary between
sleeping and waking, and kept their own miserable identity. She could
not be alone, prostrate, powerless as she was,—a cloud of faces looked
up at her, giving her no idea of fierce vivid anger, or of personal
danger, but a deep sense of shame that she should thus be the object of
universal regard—a sense of shame so acute that it seemed as if she
would fain have burrowed into the earth to hide herself, and yet she
could not escape out of that unwinking glare of many eyes.




CHAPTER XXIV.

MISTAKES CLEARED UP.

      “Your beauty was the first that won the place
    And scal’d the walls of my undaunted heart,
      Which, captive now, pines in a caitive case,
    Unkindly met with rigour for desert:—
      Yet not the less your servant shall abide,
      In spite of rude repulse or silent pride.”
              WILLIAM FOWLER.


The next morning, Margaret dragged herself up, thankful that the night
was over,—unrefreshed, yet rested. All had gone well through the house;
her mother had only wakened once. A little breeze was stirring in the
hot air, and though there were no trees to show the playful tossing
movement caused by the wind among the leaves, Margaret knew how,
somewhere or another, by wayside, in copses, or in thick green woods,
there was a pleasant, murmuring dancing sound,—a rushing and falling
noise, the very thought of which was an echo of distinct gladness in her
heart.

She sat at her work in Mrs. Hale’s room. As soon as that forenoon
slumber was over, she would help her mother to dress; after dinner, she
would go and see Bessy Higgins. She would banish all recollection of the
Thornton family—no need to think of them till they absolutely stood
before her in flesh and blood. But, of course, the effort not to think
of them brought them only the more strongly before her; and from time to
time, the hot flush came over her pale face sweeping it into colour, as
a sunbeam from between watery clouds comes swiftly moving over the sea.

Dixon opened the door very softly, and stole on tiptoe up to Margaret,
sitting by the shaded window.

“Mr. Thornton, Miss Margaret. He is in the drawing-room.”

Margaret dropped her sewing.

“Did he ask for me? Isn’t papa come in?”

“He asked for you, miss; and master is out.”

“Very well, I will come,” said Margaret, quietly. But she lingered
strangely.

Mr. Thornton stood by one of the windows, with his back to the door
apparently absorbed in watching something in the street. But, in truth,
he was afraid of himself. His heart beat thick at the thought of her
coming. He could not forget the touch of her arms around his neck,
impatiently felt as it had been at the time; but now the recollection of
her clinging defence of him, seemed to thrill him through and
through,—to melt away every resolution, all power of self-control, as
if it were wax before a fire. He dreaded lest he should go forwards to
meet her, with his arms held out in mute entreaty that she would come
and nestle there, as she had done, all unheeded, the day before, but
never unheeded again. His heart throbbed loud and quick. Strong man as
he was, he trembled at the anticipation of what he had to say, and how
it might be received. She might droop, and flush, and flutter to his
arms, as to her natural home and resting-place. One moment he glowed
with impatience at the thought that she might do this,—the next he
feared a passionate rejection, the idea of which withered up his future
with so deadly a blight that he refused to think of it. He was startled
by the sense of the presence of some one else in the room. He turned
round. She had come in so gently, that he had never heard her; the
street noises had been more distinct to his inattentive ear than her
slow movements, in her soft muslin gown.

She stood by the table, not offering to sit down. Her eyelids were
dropped half over her eyes; her teeth were shut, not compressed; her
lips were just parted over them, allowing the white line to be seen
between their curve. Her slow deep breathings dilated her chin and
beautiful nostrils; it was the only motion visible on her countenance.
The fine-grained skin, the oval cheek, the rich outline of her mouth,
its corners deep set in dimples,—were all wan and pale to-day; the loss
of their usual natural healthy colour being made more evident by the
heavy shadow of the dark hair, brought down upon her temples, to hide
all sign of the blow she had received. Her head, for all its drooping
eyes, was thrown a little back, in the old proud attitude. Her long arms
hung motionless by her sides. Altogether she looked like some prisoner,
falsely accused of a crime that she loathed and despised, and from which
she was too indignant to justify herself.

Mr. Thornton made a hasty step or two forwards; recovered himself, and
went with quiet firmness to the door (which she had left open), and shut
it. Then he came back, and stood opposite to her for a moment, receiving
the general impression of her beautiful presence, before he dared to
disturb it, perhaps to repel it, by what he had to say.

“Miss Hale, I was very ungrateful yesterday—”

“You had nothing to be grateful for,” said she raising her eyes, and
looking full and straight at him. “You mean, I suppose, that you believe
you ought to thank me for what I did.” In spite of herself—in defiance
of her anger—the thick blushes came all over her face, and burnt into
her very eyes; which fell not nevertheless from their grave and steady
look. “It was only a natural instinct; any woman would have done just
the same. We all feel the sanctity of our sex as a high privilege when
we see danger. I ought rather,” said she, hastily, “to apologise to you,
for having said thoughtless words which sent you down into the danger.”

“It was not your words; it was the truth they conveyed, pungently as it
was expressed. But you shall not drive me off upon that, and so escape
the expression of my deep gratitude, my—” he was on the verge now; he
would not speak in the haste of his hot passion; he would weigh each
word. He would; and his will was triumphant. He stopped in mid career.

“I do not try to escape from anything,” said she. “I simply say, that
you owe me no gratitude; and I may add, that any expression of it will
be painful to me, because I do not feel that I deserve it. Still, if it
will relieve you from even a fancied obligation, speak on.”

“I do not want to be relieved from any obligation,” said he, goaded by
her calm manner. “Fancied, or not fancied—I question not myself to know
which—I choose to believe that I owe my very life to you—ay—smile,
and think it an exaggeration if you will. I believe it, because it adds
a value to that life to think—oh, Miss Hale!” continued he, lowering
his voice to such a tender intensity of passion that she shivered and
trembled before him, “to think circumstances so wrought, that whenever I
exult in existence henceforward, I may say to myself, ‘All this gladness
in life, all honest pride in doing my work in the world, all this keen
sense of being, I owe to her!’ And it doubles the gladness, it makes the
pride glow, it sharpens the sense of existence till I hardly know if it
is pain or pleasure to think that I owe it to one—nay, you must, you
shall hear,”—said he, stepping forward with stern determination—“to
one whom I love, as I do not believe man ever loved woman before.” He
held her hand tight in his. He panted as he listened for what should
come. He threw the hand away with indignation, as he heard her icy
tone; for icy it was, though the words came faltering out, as if she
knew not where to find them.

“Your way of speaking shocks me. It is blasphemous. I cannot help it, if
that is my first feeling. It might not be so, I dare say, if I
understood the kind of feeling you describe. I do not want to vex you;
and besides, we must speak gently, for mamma is asleep; but your whole
manner offends me—”

“How!” exclaimed he. “Offends you! I am indeed most unfortunate.”

“Yes!” said she with recovered dignity. “I do feel offended; and, I
think, justly. You seem to fancy that my conduct of yesterday”—again
the deep carnation blush, but this time with eyes kindling with
indignation rather than shame—“was a personal act between you and me;
and that you may come and thank me for it, instead of perceiving, as a
gentleman would—yes! a gentleman,” she repeated, in allusion to their
former conversation about that word, “that any woman, worthy of the name
of woman, would come forward to shield, with her reverenced
helplessness, a man in danger from the violence of numbers.”

“And the gentleman thus rescued is forbidden the relief of thanks!” he
broke in contemptuously. “I am a man. I claim the right of expressing my
feelings.”

“And I yielded to the right; simply saying that you gave me pain by
insisting upon it,” she replied, proudly. “But you seem to have
imagined, that I was not merely guided by womanly instinct, but”—and
here the passionate tears (kept down for long—struggled with
vehemently) came up into her eyes and choked her voice—“but that I was
prompted by some particular feeling for you—you! Why, there was not a
man—not a poor desperate man in all that crowd—for whom I had not more
sympathy—for whom I should not have done what little I could more
heartily.”

“You may speak on, Miss Hale. I am aware of these misplaced sympathies
of yours. I now believe that it was only your innate sense of
oppression—(yes; I, though a master, may be oppressed)—that made you
act so nobly as you did. I know you despise me; allow me to say, it is
because you do not understand me.”

“I do not care to understand,” she replied, taking hold of the table to
steady herself; for she thought him cruel—as, indeed, he was—and she
was weak with her indignation.

“No, I see you do not. You are unfair and unjust.”

Margaret compressed her lips. She would not speak in answer to such
accusations. But, for all that—for all his savage words, he could have
thrown himself at her feet, and kissed the hem of her garment. She did
not speak; she did not move. The tears of wounded pride fell hot and
fast. He waited awhile, longing for her to say something, even a taunt,
to which he might reply. But she was silent. He took up his hat.

“One word more. You look as if you thought it tainted you to be loved by
me. You cannot avoid it. Nay, I, if I would, cannot cleanse you from it.
But I would not if I could. I have never loved any woman before: my
life has been too busy, my thoughts too much absorbed with other things.
Now I love, and will love. But do not be afraid of too much expression
on my part.”

“I am not afraid,” she replied, lifting herself straight up. “No one yet
has ever dared to be impertinent to me, and no one ever shall. But, Mr.
Thornton, you have been very kind to my father,” said she, changing her
whole tone and bearing to a most womanly softness. “Don’t let us go on
making each other angry. Pray don’t!” He took no notice of her words; he
occupied himself in smoothing the nap of his hat with his coat-sleeve,
for half a minute or so; and then, rejecting her offered hand, and
making as if he did not see her grave look of regret, he turned abruptly
away, and left the room. Margaret caught one glance at his face before
he went.

When he was gone she thought she had seen the gleam of washed tears in
his eyes; and that turned her proud dislike into something different and
kinder, if nearly as painful—self-reproach for having caused such
mortification to any one.

“But how could I help it?” asked she of herself. “I never liked him. I
was civil; but I took no trouble to conceal my indifference. Indeed, I
never thought about myself or him, so my manners must have shown the
truth. All that yesterday, he might mistake. But that is his fault, not
mine. I would do it again, if need were, though it does lead me into all
this shame and trouble.”




CHAPTER XXV.

FREDERICK.

            “Revenge may have her own;
    Roused discipline aloud proclaims their cause,
    And injured navies urge their broken laws.”
              BYRON.


Margaret began to wonder whether all offers were as unexpected
beforehand,—as distressing at the time of their occurrence, as the two
she had had. An involuntary comparison between Mr. Lennox and Mr.
Thornton arose in her mind. She had been sorry, that an expression of
any other feeling than friendship had been lured out by circumstances
from Henry Lennox. That regret was the predominant feeling, on the first
occasion of her receiving a proposal. She had not felt so stunned—so
impressed as she did now, when echoes of Mr. Thornton’s voice yet
lingered about the room. In Lennox’s case, he seemed for a moment to
have slid over the boundary between friendship and love; and the instant
afterwards, to regret it nearly as much as she did, although for
different reasons. In Mr. Thornton’s case, as far as Margaret knew,
there was no intervening stage of friendship. Their intercourse had been
one continued series of opposition. Their opinions clashed; and indeed,
she had never perceived that he had cared for her opinions, as belonging
to her, the individual. As far as they defied his rock-like power of
character, his passion-strength, he seemed to throw them off from him
with contempt, until she felt the weariness of the exertion of making
useless protests; and now, he had come, in this strange wild passionate
way, to make known his love! For, although at first it had struck her,
that his offer was forced and goaded out of him by sharp compassion for
the exposure she had made of herself,—which he, like others, might
misunderstand—yet, even before he left the room,—and certainly not
five minutes after, the clear conviction dawned upon her, shined bright
upon her, that he did love her; that he had loved her; that he would
love her. And she shrank and shuddered as under the fascination of some
great power, repugnant to her whole previous life. She crept away, and
hid from his idea. But it was of no use. To parody a line out of
Fairfax’s Tasso—

    “His strong idea wandered through her thought.”

She disliked him the more for having mastered her inner will. How dared
he say that he would love her still, even though she shook him off with
contempt? She wished she had spoken more—stronger. Sharp, decisive
speeches came thronging into her mind, now that it was too late to utter
them. The deep impression made by the interview, was like that of a
horror in a dream; that will not leave the room although we waken up,
and rub our eyes, and force a stiff rigid smile upon our lips. It is
there—there, cowering and gibbering, with fixed ghastly eyes, in some
corner of the chamber, listening to hear whether we dare to breathe of
its presence to any one. And we dare not; poor cowards that we are!

And so she shuddered away from the threat of his enduring love. What did
he mean? Had she not the power to daunt him? She would see. It was more
daring than became a man to threaten her so. Did he ground it upon the
miserable yesterday? If need were, she would do the same to-morrow,—by
a crippled beggar, willingly and gladly,—but by him, she would do it,
just as bravely, in spite of his deductions, and the cold slime of
woman’s impertinence. She did it because it was right, and simple, and
true to save where she could save; even to try to save. “Fais ce que
dois, advienne que pourra.”

Hitherto she had not stirred from where he had left her; no outward
circumstances had roused her out of the trance of thought in which she
had been plunged by his last words, and by the look of his deep intent
passionate eyes, as their flames had made her own fall before them. She
went to the window, and threw it open, to dispel the oppression which
hung around her. Then she went and opened the door, with a sort of
impetuous wish to shake off the recollection of the past hour, in the
company of others, or in active exertion. But all was profoundly hushed
in the noonday stillness of a house, where an invalid catches the
unrefreshing sleep that is denied to the night-hours. Margaret would not
be alone. What should she do? “Go and see Bessy Higgins, of course,”
thought she, as the recollection of the message sent the night before
flashed into her mind. And away she went.

When she got there, she found Bessy lying on the settle, moved close to
the fire, though the day was sultry and oppressive. She was laid down
quite flat, as if resting languidly after some paroxysm of pain.
Margaret felt sure she ought to have the greater freedom of breathing
which a more sitting posture would procure; and, without a word, she
raised her up, and so arranged the pillows, that Bessy was more at ease,
though very languid.

“I thought I should na’ ha’ seen yo’ again,” said she, at last, looking
wistfully in Margaret’s face.

“I’m afraid you’re much worse. But I could not have come yesterday, my
mother was so ill—for many reasons,” said Margaret, colouring.

“Yo’d m’appen think I went beyond my place in sending Mary for yo’. But
the wraglin’ and the loud voices had just torn me to pieces, and I
thought when father left, oh! if I could just hear her voice, reading me
some words o’ peace and promise, I could die away into the silence and
rest o’ God, just as a baby is hushed up to sleep by its mother’s
lullaby.”

“Shall I read you a chapter, now?”

“Ay, do! M’appen I shan’t listen to th’ sense, at first; it will seem
far away—but when yo’ come to words I like—to th’ comforting
texts—it’ll seem close in my ear, and going through me as it were.”

Margaret began. Bessy tossed to and fro. If, by an effort, she attended
for one moment, it seemed as though she were convulsed into double
restlessness the next. At last, she burst out: “Don’t go on reading.
It’s no use. I’m blaspheming all the time in my mind, wi’ thinking
angrily on what canna be helped.—Yo’d hear of th’ riot, m’appen,
yesterday at Marlborough Mills? Thornton’s factory, yo’ know.”

“Your father was not there, was he?” said Margaret colouring deeply.

“Not he. He’d ha’ given his right hand if it had never come to pass.
It’s that that’s fretting me. He’s fairly knocked down in his mind by
it. It’s no use telling him, fools will always break out o’ bounds. Yo’
never saw a man so downhearted as he is.”

“But why?” asked Margaret. “I don’t understand.”

“Why, yo’ see, he’s a committee-man on this special strike. Th’ Union
appointed him because, though I say it as shouldn’t say it, he’s
reckoned a deep chap, and true to th’ back-bone. And he and t’other
committee-men laid their plans. They were to hou’d together through
thick and thin; what the major part thought, t’others were to think,
whether they would or no. And above all there was to be no going again
the law of the land. Folk would go with them if they saw them striving
and starving wi’ dumb patience; but if there was once any noise o’
fighting and struggling—even wi’ knobsticks—all was up, as they know
by th’ experience of many, and many a time before. They would try and
get speech o’ th’ knobsticks, and coax ’em, and reason wi’ ’em, and
m’appen warn ’em off; but whatever came, the Committee charged all
members o’ th’ Union to lie down and die, if need were, without striking
a blow; and then they reckoned they were sure o’ carrying th’ public
with them. And besides all that, Committee knew they were right in their
demand, and they didn’t want to have right all mixed up wi’ wrong, till
folk can’t separate it, no more nor I can the physic-powder from th’
jelly yo’ gave me to mix it in; jelly is much the biggest, but powder
tastes it all through. Well, I’ve told yo’ at length about this’n, but I
am tired out. Yo’ just think for yor’sel, what it mun be for father to
have a’ his work undone, and by such a fool as Boucher, who must needs
go right again the orders of Committee, and ruin th’ strike, just as bad
as if he meant to be a Judas. Eh! but father giv’d it him last night! He
went so far as to say, he’d go and tell police where they might find th’
ringleader o’ th’ riot; he’d give him up to th’ mill-owners to do what
they would wi’ him. He’d show the world that th’ real leaders o’ the
strike were not such as Boucher, but steady thoughtful men; good hands,
and good citizens, who were friendly to law and judgment, and would
uphold order; who only wanted their right wage, and wouldn’t work, even
though they starved, till they got ’em; but who would ne’er injure
property or life. For,” dropping her voice, “they do say, that Boucher
threw a stone at Thornton’s sister, that welly killed her.”

“That’s not true,” said Margaret. “It was not Boucher that threw the
stone”—she went first red, then white.

“Yo’d be there then, were yo’?” asked Bessie languidly: for indeed, she
had spoken with many pauses, as if speech was unusually difficult to
her.

“Yes. Never mind. Go on. Only it was not Boucher that threw the stone.
But what did he answer to your father?”

“He did na’ speak words. He were all in such a tremble wi’ spent
passion, I could na’ bear to look at him. I heard his breath coming
quick, and at one time I thought he were sobbing. But when father said
he’d give him up to police, he gave a great cry, and struck father on
th’ face wi’ his closed fist, and he off like lightning. Father were
stunned wi’ the blow at first, for all Boucher were weak wi’ passion and
wi’ clemming. He sat down a bit, and put his hand afore his eyes; and
then made for th’ door. I dunno’ where I got strength, but I threw
mysel’ oh th’ settle and clung to him. ‘Father, father!’ said I.
‘Thou’ll never go peach on that poor clemmed man. I’ll never leave go on
thee, till thou sayst thou wunnot.’ ‘Dunnot be a fool,’ says he, ‘words
come readier than deeds to most men. I never thought o’ telling th’
police on him; though by G—, he deserves it, and I should na’ ha’
minded if some one else had done the dirty work, and got him clapped up.
But now he has strucken me, I could do it less nor ever, for it would be
getting other men to take up my quarrel. But if ever he gets well o’er
this clemming, and is in good condition, he and I’ll have an up and down
fight, purring an’ a’, and I’ll see what I can do for him.’ And so
father shook me off,—for indeed I was low and faint enough, and his
face was all clay white, where it weren’t bloody, and turned me sick to
look at. And I know not if I slept or waked, or were in a dead swoon,
till Mary come in; and I telled her to fetch yo’ to me. And now dunnot
talk to me, but just read out th’ chapter. I’m easier in my mind for
having spit it out; but I want some thoughts of the world that’s far
away to take the weary taste of it out of my mouth. Read me not a sermon
chapter, but a story chapter; they’ve pictures in them, which I see when
my eyes are shut. Read about the New Heavens, and the New Earth; and
m’appen I’ll forget this.”

Margaret read in her soft low voice. Though Bessy’s eyes were shut, she
was listening for some time, for the moisture of tears gathered heavy on
her eyelashes. At last she slept; with many starts, and muttered
pleadings. Margaret covered her up, and left her, for she had an uneasy
consciousness that she might be wanted at home, and yet, until now, it
seemed cruel to leave the dying girl.

Mrs. Hale was in the drawing-room on her daughter’s return. It was one
of her better days, and she was full of praises of the water-bed. It had
been more like the beds at Sir John Beresford’s than anything she had
slept on since. She did not know how it was, but people seemed to have
lost the art of making the same kind of beds as they used to do in her
youth. One would think it was easy enough; there was the same kind of
feathers to be had, and yet somehow, till this last night she did not
know when she had had a good sound resting sleep.

Mr. Hale suggested, that something of the merits of the feather-beds of
former days might be attributed to the activity of youth, which gave a
relish to rest; but this idea was not kindly received by his wife.

“No, indeed, Mr. Hale, it was those beds at Sir John’s. Now, Margaret,
you’re young enough, and go about in the day; are the beds comfortable?
I appeal to you. Do they give you a feeling of perfect repose when you
lie down upon them; or rather, don’t you toss about, and try in vain to
find an easy position, and wake in the morning as tired as when you went
to bed?”

Margaret laughed. “To tell the truth, mamma, I’ve never thought about my
bed at all, what kind it is. I’m so sleepy at night, that if I only lie
down anywhere, I nap off directly. So I don’t think I’m a competent
witness. But then, you know, I never had the opportunity of trying Sir
John Beresford’s beds. I never was at Oxenham.”

“Were you not? Oh, no! to be sure. It was poor darling Fred I took with
me, I remember. I only went to Oxenham once after I was married,—to
your Aunt Shaw’s wedding; and poor little Fred was the baby then. And I
know Dixon did not like changing from lady’s maid to nurse, and I was
afraid that if I took her near her old home, and amongst her own people,
she might want to leave me. But poor baby was taken ill at Oxenham, with
his teething; and, what with my being a great deal with Anna just before
her marriage, and not being very strong myself, Dixon had more of the
charge of him than she ever had before; and it made her so fond of him,
and she was so proud when he would turn away from every one and cling
to her, that I don’t believe she ever thought of leaving me again;
though it was very different from what she’d been accustomed to. Poor
Fred! Everybody loved him. He was born with the gift of winning hearts.
It makes me think very badly of Captain Reid when I know that he
disliked my own dear boy. I think it a certain proof he had a bad heart.
Ah! Your poor father, Margaret. He has left the room. He can’t bear to
hear Fred spoken of.”

“I love to hear about him, mamma. Tell me all you like; you never can
tell me too much. Tell me what he was like as a baby.”

“Why, Margaret, you must not be hurt, but he was much prettier than you
were. I remember, when I first saw you in Dixon’s arms, I said, ‘Dear,
what an ugly little thing!’ And she said, ‘It’s not every child that’s
like Master Fred, bless him!’ Dear! how well I remember it. Then I could
have had Fred in my arms every minute of the day, and his cot was close
by my bed; and now, now—Margaret—I don’t know where my boy is, and
sometimes I think I shall never see him again.”

Margaret sat down by her mother’s sofa on a little stool, and softly
took hold of her hand, caressing it and kissing it, as if to comfort.
Mrs. Hale cried without restraint. At last, she sat straight, stiff up
on the sofa, and turning round to her daughter, she said with tearful,
almost solemn earnestness, “Margaret, if I can get better,—if God lets
me have a chance of recovery, it must be through seeing my son Frederick
once more. It will waken up all the poor springs of health left in me.”

She paused, and seemed to try and gather strength for something more yet
to be said. Her voice was choked as she went on—was quavering as with
the contemplation of some strange, yet closely-present idea.

“And, Margaret, if I am to die—if I am one of those appointed to die
before many weeks are over—I must see my child first. I cannot think
how it must be managed; but I charge you, Margaret, as you yourself hope
for comfort in your last illness, bring him to me that I may bless him.
Only for five minutes, Margaret. There could be no danger in five
minutes. Oh, Margaret, let me see him before I die!”

Margaret did not think of anything that might be utterly unreasonable in
this speech: we do not look for reason or logic in the passionate
entreaties of those who are sick unto death; we are stung with the
recollection of a thousand slighted opportunities of fulfilling the
wishes of those who will soon pass away from among us: and do they ask
us for the future happiness of our lives, we lay it at their feet, and
will it away from us. But this wish of Mrs. Hale’s was so natural, so
just, so right to both parties, that Margaret felt as if, on Frederick’s
account as well as on her mother’s, she ought to overlook all
intermediate chances of danger, and pledge herself to do everything in
her power for its realization. The large, pleading, dilated eyes were
fixed upon her wistfully, steady in their gaze, though the poor white
lips quivered like those of a child. Margaret gently rose up and stood
opposite to her frail mother; so that she might gather the secure
fulfilment of her wish from the calm steadiness of her daughter’s face.

“Mamma, I will write to-night, and tell Frederick what you say. I am as
sure that he will come directly to us, as I am sure of my life. Be easy,
mamma, you shall see him as far as anything earthly can be promised.”

“You will write to-night? Oh, Margaret! the post goes out at five—you
will write by it, won’t you? I have so few hours left—I feel dear, as
if I should not recover, though sometimes your father over-persuades me
into hoping; you will write directly, won’t you? Don’t lose a single
post; for just by that very post I may miss him.”

“But, mamma, papa is out.”

“Papa is out! and what then? Do you mean that he would deny me this last
wish, Margaret? Why, I should not be ill, be dying—if he had not taken
me away from Helstone, to this unhealthy, smoky, sunless place.”

“Oh, mamma!” said Margaret.

“Yes; it is so, indeed. He knows it himself; he has said so many a time.
He would do anything for me; you don’t mean he would refuse me this last
wish—prayer, if you will. And, indeed, Margaret, the longing to see
Frederick stands between me and God. I cannot pray till I have this one
thing; indeed, I cannot. Don’t lose time, dear, dear Margaret. Write by
this very next post. Then he may be here—here in twenty-two days! For
he is sure to come. No cords or chains can keep him. In twenty-two days
I shall see my boy.” She fell back, and for a short time she took no
notice of the fact that Margaret sat motionless, her hand shading her
eyes.

“You are not writing!” said her mother at last. “Bring me some pens and
paper; I will try and write myself.” She sat up, trembling all over with
feverish eagerness. Margaret took her hand down, and looked at her
mother sadly.

“Only wait till papa comes in. Let us ask him how best to do it?”

“You promised, Margaret, not a quarter of an hour ago,—you said he
should come.”

“And so he shall, mamma; don’t cry, my own dear mother. I’ll write here,
now—you shall see me write—and it shall go by this very post; and if
papa thinks fit he can write again when he comes in—it is only a day’s
delay. Oh, mamma, don’t cry so pitifully, it cuts me to the heart.”

Mrs. Hale could not stop her tears; they came hysterically; and, in
truth, she made no effort to control them, but rather called up all the
pictures of the happy past, and the probable future—painting the scene
when she should lie a corpse, with the son she had longed to see in life
weeping over her, and she unconscious of his presence—till she was
melted by self-pity into a state of sobbing and exhaustion that made
Margaret’s heart ache. But at last she was calm, and greedily watched
her daughter, as she began her letter; wrote it with swift urgent
entreaty; sealed it up hurriedly, for fear her mother should ask to see
it: and then to make security most sure, at Mrs. Hale’s own bidding,
took it herself to the post-office. She was coming home when her father
overtook her.

“And where have you been, my pretty maid?” asked he.

“To the post-office—with a letter; a letter to Frederick. Oh, papa,
perhaps I have done wrong: but mamma was seized with such a passionate
yearning to see him—she said it would make her well again—and then she
said that she must see him before she died—I cannot tell you how urgent
she was! Did I do wrong?”

Mr. Hale did not reply at first. Then he said:

“You should have waited till I came in, Margaret.”

“I tried to persuade her—” and then she was silent.

“I don’t know,” said Mr. Hale, after a pause. “She ought to see him if
she wishes it so much; for I believe it would do her much more good than
all the doctor’s medicine—and, perhaps, set her up altogether; but the
danger to him, I’m afraid, is very great.”

“All these years since the mutiny, papa?”

“Yes; it is necessary, of course, for government to take very stringent
measures for the repression of offences against authority, more
particularly in the navy, where a commanding officer needs to be
surrounded in his men’s eyes with a vivid consciousness of all the power
there is at home to back him, and take up his cause, and avenge any
injuries offered to him, if need be. Ah! it’s no matter to them how far
their authorities have tyrannised—galled hasty tempers to madness—or,
if that can be any excuse afterwards, it is never allowed for in the
first instance; they spare no expense, they send out ships—they scour
the seas to lay hold of the offenders—the lapse of years does not wash
out the memory of the offence—it is a fresh and vivid crime on the
Admiralty books till it is blotted out by blood.”

“Oh, papa, what have I done! And yet it seemed so right at the time. I’m
sure Frederick himself, would run the risk.”

“So he would; so he should! Nay, Margaret, I’m glad it is done, though I
durst not have done it myself. I’m thankful it is as it is; I should
have hesitated till, perhaps, it might have been too late to do any
good. Dear Margaret, you have done what is right about it; and the end
is beyond our control.”

It was all very well; but her father’s account of the relentless manner
in which mutinies were punished made Margaret shiver and creep. If she
had decoyed her brother home to blot out the memory of his error by his
blood! She saw her father’s anxiety lap deeper than the source of his
latter cheering words. She took his arm and walked home pensively and
wearily by his side.




CHAPTER XXVI.

MOTHER AND SON

    “I have found that holy place of rest
    Still changeless.”
              MRS. HEMANS.


When Mr. Thornton had left the house that morning he was almost blinded
by his baffled passion. He was as dizzy as if Margaret, instead of
looking, and speaking, and moving like a tender graceful woman, had been
a sturdy fish-wife, and given him a sound blow with her fists. He had
positive bodily pain—a violent headache, and a throbbing intermittent
pulse. He could not bear the noise, the garish light, the continued
rumble and movement of the street. He called himself a fool for
suffering so; and yet he could not, at the moment, recollect the cause
of his suffering, and whether it was adequate to the consequences it had
produced. It would have been a relief to him, if he could have sat down
and cried on a door-step by a little child, who was raging and storming,
through his passionate tears, at some injury he had received. He said to
himself, that he hated Margaret, but a wild, sharp sensation of love
cleft his dull, thunderous feeling like lightning, even as he shaped the
words expressive of hatred. His greatest comfort was in hugging his
torment and in feeling, as he had indeed said to her, that though she
might despise him, contemn him, treat him with her proud sovereign
indifference, he did not change one whit. She could not make him change.
He loved her, and would love her; and defy her, and this miserable
bodily pain.

He stood still for a moment, to make this resolution firm and clear.
There was an omnibus passing—going into the country; the conductor
thought he was wishing for a place, and stopped near the pavement. It
was too much trouble to apologise and explain; so he mounted upon it,
and was borne away—past long rows of houses—then past detached villas
with trim gardens, till they came to real country hedge-rows, and,
by-and-by, to a small country town. Then everybody got down; and so did
Mr. Thornton, and because they walked away he did so too. He went into
the fields, walking briskly, because the sharp motion relieved his mind.
He could remember all about it now; the pitiful figure he must have cut;
the absurd way in which he had gone and done the very thing he had so
often agreed with himself in thinking would be the most foolish thing in
the world; and had met with exactly the consequences which, in these
wise moods, he had always foretold were certain to follow, if he ever
did make such a fool of himself. Was he bewitched by those beautiful
eyes, that soft, half-open, sighing mouth which lay so close upon his
shoulder only yesterday? He could not even shake off the recollection
that she had been there; that her arms had been round him, once—if
never again. He only caught glimpses of her; he did not understand her
altogether. At one time she was so brave, and at another so timid; now
so tender, and then so haughty and regal proud. And then he thought
over every time he had ever seen her once again, by way of finally
forgetting her. He saw her in every dress, in every mood, and did not
know which became her best. Even this morning how magnificent she had
looked—her eyes flashing out upon him at the idea that, because she had
shared his danger yesterday, she had cared for him the least!

If Mr. Thornton was a fool in the morning, as he assured himself at
least twenty times he was, he did not grow much wiser in the afternoon.
All that he gained for his sixpenny omnibus ride, was a more vivid
conviction that there never was, never could be, any one like Margaret;
that she did not love him and never would; but that she—no! nor the
whole world—should never hinder him from loving her. And so he returned
to the little market-place, and remounted the omnibus to return to
Milton.

It was late in the afternoon when he was set down, near his warehouse.
The accustomed places brought back the accustomed habits and trains of
thought. He knew how much he had to do—more than his usual work, owing
to the commotion of the day before. He had to see his brother
magistrates; he had to complete the arrangements, only half made in the
morning, for the comfort and safety of his newly imported Irish hands;
he had to secure them from all chance of communication with the
discontented workpeople of Milton. Last of all, he had to go home and
encounter his mother.

Mrs. Thornton had sat in the dining-room all day, every moment expecting
the news of her son’s acceptance by Miss Hale. She had braced herself up
many and many a time, at some sudden noise in the house; had caught up
the half-dropped work, and begun to ply her needle diligently, though
through dimmed spectacles, and with an unsteady hand! and many times had
the door opened, and some indifferent person entered on some
insignificant errand. Then her rigid face unstiffened from its gray
frost-bound expression, and the features dropped into the relaxed look
of despondency, so unusual to their sternness. She wrenched herself away
from the contemplation of all the dreary changes that would be brought
about to herself by her son’s marriage; she forced her thoughts into the
accustomed household grooves. The newly-married couple-to-be would need
fresh household stocks of linen: and Mrs. Thornton had clothes-basket
upon clothes-basket, full of table-cloths and napkins, brought in, and
began to reckon up the store. There was some confusion between what was
hers, and consequently marked G. H. T. (for George and Hannah Thornton),
and what was her son’s—bought with his money, marked with his initials.
Some of those marked G. H. T. were Dutch damask of the old kind,
exquisitely fine; none were like them now. Mrs. Thornton stood looking
at them long,—they had been her pride when she was first married. Then
she knit her brows, and pinched and compressed her lips tight, and
carefully unpicked the G.H. She went so far as to search for the
Turkey-red marking-thread to put in the new initials; but it was all
used,—and she had no heart to send for any more just yet. So she looked
fixedly at vacancy; a series of visions passing before her, in all of
which her son was the principal, the sole object,—her son, her pride,
her property. Still he did not come. Doubtless he was with Miss Hale.
The new love was displacing her already from her place as first in his
heart. A terrible pain—a pang of vain jealousy—shot through her: she
hardly knew whether it was more physical or mental; but it forced her to
sit down. In a moment, she was up again as straight as ever,—a grim
smile upon her face for the first time that day, ready for the door
opening, and the rejoicing triumphant one, who should never know the
sore regret his mother felt at his marriage. In all this, there was
little thought enough of the future daughter-in-law as an individual.
She was to be John’s wife. To take Mrs. Thornton’s place as mistress of
the house, was only one of the rich consequences which decked out the
supreme glory: all household plenty and comfort, all purple and fine
linen, honour, love, obedience, troops of friends, would all come as
naturally as jewels on a king’s robe, and be as little thought of for
their separate value. To be chosen by John, would separate a
kitchen-wench from the rest of the world. And Miss Hale was not so bad.
If she had been a Milton lass, Mrs. Thornton would have positively liked
her. She was pungent, and had taste, and spirit, and flavour in her.
True, she was sadly prejudiced, and very ignorant; but that was to be
expected from her southern breeding. A strange sort of mortified
comparison of Fanny with her, went on in Mrs. Thornton’s mind; and for
once she spoke harshly to her daughter; abused her roundly; and then, by
way of penance, she took up Henry’s Commentaries, and tried to fix her
attention on it, instead of pursuing the employment she took pride in,
and continuing her inspection of the table-linen.

_His_ step at last! She heard him, even while she thought she was
finishing a sentence; while her eye did pass over it, and her memory
could mechanically have repeated it word for word, she heard him come in
at the hall-door. Her quickened sense could interpret every sound of
motion: now he was at the hat-stand—now at the very room-door. Why did
he pause? Let her know the worst.

Yet her head was down over the book; she did not look up. He came close
to the table, and stood still there, waiting till she should have
finished the paragraph which apparently absorbed her. By an effort she
looked up. “Well, John?”

He knew what that little speech meant. But he had steeled himself. He
longed to reply with a jest; the bitterness of his heart could have
uttered one, but his mother deserved better of him. He came round behind
her, so that she could not see his looks, and, bending back her gray,
stony face, he kissed it, murmuring:

“No one loves me,—no one cares for me, but you, mother.”

He turned away and stood leaning his head against the mantelpiece, tears
forcing themselves into his manly eyes. She stood up,—she tottered. For
the first time in her life, the strong woman tottered. She put her hands
on his shoulders; she was a tall woman. She looked into his face: she
made him look at her.

“Mother’s love is given by God, John. It holds fast for ever and ever.
A girl’s love is like a puff of smoke,—it changes with every wind. And
she would not have you, my own lad, would not she?” She set her teeth;
she showed them like a dog for the whole length of her mouth. He shook
his head.

“I am not fit for her, mother; I knew I was not.”

She ground out words between her closed teeth. He could not hear what
she said; but the look in her eyes interpreted it to be a curse,—if not
as coarsely worded, as fell in intent as ever was uttered. And yet her
heart leapt up light, to know he was her own again.

“Mother!” said he, hurriedly, “I cannot hear a word against her. Spare
me,—spare me! I am very weak in my sore heart;—I love her yet; I love
her more than ever.”

“And I hate her,” said Mrs. Thornton, in a low fierce voice. “I tried
not to hate her, when she stood between you and me, because,—I said to
myself,—she will make him happy; and I would give my heart’s blood to
do that. But now, I hate her for your misery’s sake. Yes, John, it’s no
use hiding up your aching heart from me. I am the mother that bore you,
and your sorrow is my agony; and if you don’t hate her, I do.”

“Then, mother, you make me love her more. She is unjustly treated by
you, and I must make the balance even. But why do we talk of love or
hatred? She does not care for me, and that is enough, too much. Let us
never name the subject again. It is the only thing you can do for me in
the matter. Let us never name her.”

“With all my heart. I only wish that she, and all belonging to her, were
swept back to the place they came from.”

He stood still, gazing into the fire for a minute or two longer. Her dry
dim eyes filled with unwonted tears as she looked at him; but she seemed
just as grim and quiet as usual when he next spoke.

“Warrants are out against three men for conspiracy, mother. The riot
yesterday helped to knock up the strike.”

And Margaret’s name was no more mentioned between Mrs. Thornton and her
son. They fell back into their usual mode of talk,—about facts, not
opinions, far less feelings. Their voices and tones were calm and cold;
a stranger might have gone away and thought that he had never seen such
frigid indifference of demeanour between such near relations.




CHAPTER XXVII.

FRUIT-PIECE.

    “For never any thing can be amiss
     When simpleness and duty tender it.”
                MIDSUMMER NIGHT’S DREAM.


Mr. Thornton went straight and clear into all the interests of the
following day. There was a slight demand for finished goods; and as it
affected his branch of the trade, he took advantage of it, and drove
hard bargains. He was sharp to the hour at the meeting of his brother
magistrates,—giving them the best assistance of his strong sense, and
his power of seeing consequences at a glance, and so coming to a rapid
decision. Older men, men of long standing in the town, men of far
greater wealth—realised and turned into land, while his was all
floating capital, engaged in his trade—looked to him for prompt, ready
wisdom. He was the one deputed to see and arrange with the police—to
lead in all the requisite steps. And he cared for their unconscious
deference no more than for the soft west wind, that scarcely made the
smoke from the great tall chimneys swerve in its straight upward course.
He was not aware of the silent respect paid to him. If it had been
otherwise, he would have felt it as an obstacle in his progress to the
object he had in view. As it was, he looked to the speedy accomplishment
of that alone. It was his mother’s greedy ears that sucked in, from the
womenkind of these magistrates and wealthy men, how highly Mr. This or
Mr. That thought of Mr. Thornton: that if he had not been there, things
would have gone on very differently,—very badly, indeed. He swept off
his business right and left that day. It seemed as though his deep
mortification of yesterday, and the stunned purposeless course of the
hours afterwards, had cleared away all the mists from his intellect. He
felt his power and revelled in it. He could almost defy his heart. If he
had known it, he could have sang the song of the miller who lived by the
river Dee:—

    “I care for nobody—
    Nobody cares for me.”

The evidence against Boucher, and other ring-leaders of the riot, was
taken before him: that against the three others, for conspiracy, failed.
But he sternly charged the police to be on the watch; for the swift
right arm of the law should be in readiness to strike, as soon as they
could prove a fault. And then he left the hot reeking room in the
borough court, and went out into the fresher, but still sultry street.
It seemed as though he gave way all at once; he was so languid that he
could not control his thoughts; they would wander to her: they would
bring back the scene,—not of his repulse and rejection the day before,
but the looks, the actions of the day before that. He went along the
crowded streets mechanically, winding in and out among the people, but
never seeing them,—almost sick with longing for that one
half-hour—that one brief space of time when she clung to him, and her
heart beat against his—to come once again.

“Why, Mr. Thornton! you’re cutting me very coolly, I must say. And how
is Mrs. Thornton? Brave weather this! We doctors don’t like it, I can
tell you!”

“I beg your pardon, Dr. Donaldson. I really didn’t see you. My mother’s
quite well, thank you. It is a fine day, and good for the harvest, I
hope. If the wheat is well got in, we shall have a brisk trade next
year, whatever you doctors have.”

“Ay, ay. Each man for himself. Your bad weather, and your bad times, are
my good ones. When trade is bad, there’s more undermining of health, and
preparation for death, going on among you Milton men than you’re aware
of.”

“Not with me, Doctor. I’m made of iron. The news of the very worst bad
debt I ever had, never made my pulse vary. This strike, which affects me
more than any one else in Milton,—more than Hamper,—never comes near
my appetite. You must go elsewhere for a patient, Doctor.”

“By the way, you’ve recommended me a good patient, poor lady! Not to go
on talking in this heartless way, I seriously believe that Mrs.
Hale—that lady in Crampton, you know—hasn’t many weeks to live. I
never had any hope of cure, as I think I told you; but I’ve been seeing
her to-day, and I think very badly of her.”

Mr. Thornton was silent. The vaunted steadiness of pulse failed him for
an instant.

“Can I do anything, Doctor?” he asked, in an altered voice. “You
know—you would see, that money is not very plentiful, are there any
comforts or dainties she ought to have?”

“No,” replied the Doctor, shaking his head. “She craves for fruit,—she
has a constant fever on her; but jargonelle pears will do as well as
anything, and there are quantities of them in the market.”

“You will tell me if there is anything I can do, I’m sure,” replied Mr.
Thornton. “I rely upon you.”

“Oh! never fear! I’ll not spare your purse,—I know it’s deep enough. I
wish you’d give me a carte-blanche for all my patients, and all their
wants.”

But Mr. Thornton had no general benevolence,—no universal philanthropy;
few even would have given him credit for strong affections. But he went
straight to the first fruit-shop in Milton, and chose out the bunch of
purple grapes with the most delicate bloom upon them,—the
richest-coloured peaches,—the freshest vine-leaves. They were packed
into a basket, and the shopman awaited the answer to his inquiry, “Where
shall we send them to, sir?”

There was no reply. “To Marlborough Mills, I suppose, sir?”

“No!” Mr. Thornton said. “Give the basket to me,—I’ll take it.”

It took up both his hands to carry it; and he had to pass through the
busiest part of the town for feminine shopping. Many a young lady of his
acquaintance turned to look after him, and thought it strange to see him
occupied just like a porter or an errand-boy.

He was thinking, “I will not be daunted from doing as I choose by the
thought of her. I like to take this fruit to the poor mother, and it is
simply right that I should. She shall never scorn me out of doing what I
please. A pretty joke, indeed, if, for fear of a haughty girl, I failed
in doing a kindness to a man I liked! I do it for Mr. Hale; I do it in
defiance of her.”

He went at an unusual pace, and was soon at Crampton. He went upstairs
two steps at a time, and entered the drawing-room before Dixon could
announce him,—his face flushed, his eyes shining with kindly
earnestness. Mrs. Hale lay on the sofa, heated with fever. Mr. Hale was
reading aloud. Margaret was working on a low stool by her mother’s side.
Her heart fluttered, if his did not at this interview. But he took no
notice of her,—hardly of Mr. Hale himself; he went up straight with his
basket to Mrs. Hale, and said, in that subdued and gentle tone, which is
so touching when used by a robust man in full health, speaking to a
feeble invalid,—

“I met Dr. Donaldson, ma’am, and as he said fruit would be good for you,
I have taken the liberty—the great liberty—of bringing you some that
seemed to me fine.” Mrs. Hale was excessively pleased; quite in a
tremble of eagerness. Mr. Hale with fewer words expressed a deeper
gratitude.

“Fetch a plate, Margaret—a basket—anything.” Margaret stood up by the
table, half afraid of moving or making any noise to arouse Mr. Thornton
into a consciousness of her being in the room. She thought it would be
awkward for both to be brought into conscious collision: and fancied
that, from her being on a low seat at first, and now standing behind her
father, he had overlooked her in his haste. As if he did not feel the
consciousness of her presence all over, though his eyes had never rested
on her!

“I must go,” said he, “I cannot stay. If you will forgive this
liberty,—my rough ways,—too abrupt, I fear—but I will be more gentle
next time. You will allow me the pleasure of bringing you some fruit
again, if I should see any that is tempting. Good afternoon, Mr. Hale.
Good-bye, ma’am.”

He was gone. Not one word: not one look to Margaret. She believed that
he had not seen her. She went for a plate in silence, and lifted the
fruit out tenderly, with the points of her delicate taper fingers. It
was good of him to bring it; and after yesterday too!

“Oh! it is so delicious!” said Mrs. Hale, in a feeble voice. “How kind
of him to think of me! Margaret love, only taste these grapes! Was it
not good of him?”

“Yes!” said Margaret, quietly.

“Margaret!” said Mrs. Hale, rather querulously, “you won’t like anything
Mr. Thornton does. I never saw anybody so prejudiced.”

Mr. Hale had been peeling a peach for his wife; and, cutting off a small
piece for himself, he said:

“If I had any prejudices, the gift of such delicious fruit as this would
melt them away. I have not tasted such fruit—no! not even in
Hampshire—since I was a boy; and, to boys, I fancy, all fruit is good.
I remember eating sloes and crabs with a relish. Do you remember the
matted-up currant bushes, Margaret, at the corner of the west-wall at
the garden at home?”

Did she not? Did she not remember every weather-stain on the old stone
wall; the gray and yellow lichens that marked it like a map; the little
crane’s-bill that grew in the crevices? She had been shaken by the
events of the last two days; her whole life just now was a strain upon
her fortitude; and, somehow, these careless words of her father’s,
touching on the remembrance of the sunny times of old, made her start
up, and, dropping her sewing on the ground, she went hastily out of the
room into her own little chamber. She had hardly given way to the first
choking sob, when she became aware of Dixon standing at her drawers, and
evidently searching for something.

“Bless me, miss! How you startled me! Missus is not worse, is she? Is
anything the matter?”

“No, nothing. Only I’m silly, Dixon, and want a glass of water. What are
you looking for? I keep my muslins in that drawer.”

Dixon did not speak, but went on rummaging. The scent of lavender came
out and perfumed the room.

At last Dixon found what she wanted; what it was Margaret could not see.
Dixon faced round, and spoke to her:

“Now I don’t like telling what I wanted, because you’ve fretting enough
to go through, and I know you’ll fret about this. I meant to have kept
it from you till night, may be, or such times as that.”

“What is the matter? Pray, tell me, Dixon, at once.”

“That young woman you go to see—Higgins I mean.”

“Well?”

“Well! she died this morning, and her sister is here—come to beg a
strange thing. It seems, the young woman who died had a fancy for being
buried in something of yours, and so the sister’s come to ask for
it,—and I was looking for a night-cap that wasn’t too good to give
away.”

“Oh! let me find one,” said Margaret, in the midst of her tears. “Poor
Bessy! I never thought I should not see her again.”

“Why, that’s another thing. This girl downstairs wanted me to ask you,
if you would like to see her.”

“But she’s dead!” said Margaret, turning a little pale. “I never saw a
dead person. No! I would rather not.”

“I should never have asked you, if you hadn’t come in. I told her you
wouldn’t.”

“I will go down and speak to her,” said Margaret, afraid lest Dixon’s
harshness of manner might wound the poor girl. So, taking the cap in her
hand, she went to the kitchen. Mary’s face was all swollen with crying,
and she burst out afresh when she saw Margaret.

“Oh, ma’am, she loved yo’, she loved yo’, she did indeed!” And for a
long time, Margaret could not get her to say anything more than this. At
last, her sympathy, and Dixon’s scolding, forced out a few facts.
Nicholas Higgins had gone out in the morning, leaving Bessy as well as
on the day before. But in an hour she was taken worse; some neighbour
ran to the room where Mary was working; they did not know where to find
her father; Mary had only come in a few minutes before she died.

“It were a day or two ago she axed to be buried in somewhat o’ yourn.
She were never tired o’ talking o’ yo’. She used to say yo’ were the
prettiest thing she ever clapped eyes on. She loved yo’ dearly. Her last
words were ‘Give her my affectionate respects; and keep father fro’
drink.’ Yo’ll come and see her ma’am. She would ha’ thought it a great
compliment, I know.”

Margaret shrank a little from answering.

“Yes, perhaps I may. Yes, I will. I’ll come before tea. But where’s your
father, Mary?”

Mary shook her head, and stood up to be going.

“Miss Hale,” said Dixon, in a low voice, “where’s the use o’ your going
to see the poor thing laid out? I’d never say a word against it, if it
could do the girl any good; and I wouldn’t mind a bit going myself, if
that would satisfy her. They’ve just a notion, these common folks, of
its being a respect to the departed. Here,” said she, turning sharply
round, “I’ll come and see your sister. Miss Hale is busy, and she can’t
come, or else she would.”

The girl looked wistfully at Margaret. Dixon’s coming might be a
compliment, but it was not the same thing to the poor sister, who had
had her little pangs of jealousy, during Bessy’s lifetime, at the
intimacy between her and the young lady.

“No, Dixon!” said Margaret with decision. “I will go. Mary, you shall
see me this afternoon.” And for fear of her own cowardice, she went
away, in order to take from herself any chance of changing her
determination.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

COMFORT IN SORROW.

    “Through cross to crown!—And though thy spirit’s life
      Trials untold assail with giant strength,
    Good cheer! good cheer! Soon ends the bitter strife,
      And thou shalt reign in peace with Christ at length.”
              KOSEGARTEN.

    “Ay sooth, we feel too strong in weal, to need Thee on that road;
    But woe being come, the soul is dumb, that crieth not on ‘God.’”
              MRS. BROWNING.


That afternoon she walked swiftly to the Higgins’s house. Mary was
looking out for her, with a half-distrustful face. Margaret smiled into
her eyes to re-assure her. They passed quickly through the house-place,
upstairs, and into the quiet presence of the dead. Then Margaret was
glad that she had come. The face, so often weary with pain, so restless
with troublous thoughts, had now the faint soft smile of eternal rest
upon it. The slow tears gathered into Margaret’s eyes, but a deep calm
entered into her soul. And that was death! It looked more peaceful than
life. All beautiful scriptures came into her mind. “They rest from their
labours.” “The weary are at rest.” “He giveth his beloved sleep.”

Slowly, slowly Margaret turned away from the bed. Mary was humbly
sobbing in the back-ground. They went downstairs without a word.

Resting his hand upon the house-table, Nicholas Higgins stood in the
midst of the floor; his great eyes startled open by the news he had
heard, as he came along the court, from many busy tongues. His eyes were
dry and fierce; studying the reality of her death; bringing himself to
understand that her place should know her no more. For she had been
sickly, dying so long, that he had persuaded himself she would not die;
that she would “pull through.”

Margaret felt as if she had no business to be there, familiarly
acquainting herself with the surroundings of death, which he, the
father, had only just learnt. There had been a pause of an instant on
the steep crooked stair, when she first saw him; but now she tried to
steal past his abstracted gaze, and to leave him in the solemn circle of
his household misery.

Mary sat down on the first chair she came to, and throwing her apron
over her head, began to cry.

The noise appeared to rouse him. He took sudden hold of Margaret’s arm,
and held her till he could gather words to speak. His throat seemed dry;
they came up thick, and choked, and hoarse:

“Were yo’ with her? Did yo’ see her die?”

“No!” replied Margaret, standing still with the utmost patience, now she
found herself perceived. It was some time before he spoke again, but he
kept his hold on her arm.

“All men must die,” said he at last, with a strange sort of gravity,
which first suggested to Margaret the idea that he had been
drinking—not enough to intoxicate himself, but enough to make his
thoughts bewildered. “But she were younger than me.” Still he pondered
over the event, not looking at Margaret, though he grasped her tight.
Suddenly, he looked up at her with a wild searching inquiry in his
glance. “Yo’re sure and certain she’s dead—not in a dwam, a faint?
she’s been so before, often.”

“She is dead,” replied Margaret. She felt no fear in speaking to him,
though he hurt her arm with his gripe, and wild gleams came across the
stupidity of his eyes.

“She is dead!” she said.

He looked at her still with that searching look, which seemed to fade
out of his eyes as he gazed. Then he suddenly let go his hold of
Margaret, and, throwing his body half across the table, he shook it and
every piece of furniture in the room, with his violent sobs. Mary came
trembling towards him.

“Get thee gone!—get thee gone!” he cried, striking wildly and blindly
at her. “What do I care for thee?” Margaret took her hand and held it
softly in hers. He tore his hair, he beat his head against the hard
wood, then he lay exhausted and stupid. Still his daughter and Margaret
did not move. Mary trembled from head to foot.

At last—it might have been a quarter of an hour, it might have been an
hour—he lifted himself up. His eyes were swollen and bloodshot, and he
seemed to have forgotten that any one was by; he scowled at the watchers
when he saw them. He shook himself heavily, gave them one more sullen
look, spoke never a word, but made for the door.

“Oh, father, father!” said Mary, throwing herself upon his arm,—“not
to-night! Any night but to-night. Oh, help me! he’s going out to drink
again! Father, I’ll not leave yo’. Yo’ may strike, but I’ll not leave
yo’. She told me last of all to keep yo’ fro’ drink!”

But Margaret stood in the doorway, silent yet commanding. He looked up
at her defyingly.

“It’s my own house. Stand out o’ the way, wench, or I’ll make yo’!” He
had shaken off Mary with violence; he looked ready to strike Margaret.
But she never moved a feature—never took her deep, serious eyes off
him. He stared back on her with gloomy fierceness. If she had stirred
hand or foot, he would have thrust her aside with even more violence
than he had used to his own daughter, whose face was bleeding from her
fall against a chair.

“What are yo’ looking at me in that way for?” asked he at last, daunted
and awed by her severe calm. “If yo’ think for to keep me from going
what gait I choose, because she loved yo’—and in my own house, too,
where I never asked yo’ to come, yo’re mista’en. It’s very hard upon a
man that he can’t go to the only comfort left.”

Margaret felt that he acknowledged her power. What could she do next? He
had seated himself on a chair, close to the door; half-conquered
half-resenting; intending to go out as soon as she left her position,
but unwilling to use the violence he had threatened not five minutes
before. Margaret laid her hand on his arm.

“Come with me,” she said. “Come and see her!”

The voice in which she spoke was very low and solemn; but there was no
fear or doubt expressed in it, either of him or of his compliance. He
sullenly rose up. He stood uncertain, with dogged irresolution upon his
face. She waited him there; quietly and patiently waited for his time to
move. He had a strange pleasure in making her wait; but at last he moved
towards the stairs.

She and he stood by the corpse.

“Her last words to Mary were, ‘Keep my father fro’ drink.’”

“It canna hurt her now,” muttered he. “Nought can hurt her now.” Then,
raising his voice to a wailing cry, he went on: “We may quarrel and fall
out—we may make peace and be friends—we may clem to skin and bone—and
nought o’ all our griefs will ever touch her more. Hoo’s had her portion
on ’em. What wi’ hard work first, and sickness at last, hoo’ led the
life of a dog. And to die without knowing one good piece o’ rejoicing in
all her days! Nay, wench, whatever hoo said, hoo can know nought about
it now, and I mun ha’ a sup o’ drink just to steady me again sorrow.”

“No,” said Margaret, softening with his softened manner. “You shall not.
If her life has been what you say, at any rate she did not fear death as
some do. Oh, you should have heard her speak of the life to come—the
life hidden with God, that she is now gone to.”

He shook his head, glancing sideways up at Margaret as he did so. His
pale haggard face struck her painfully.

“You are sorely tried. Where have you been all day—not at work?”

“Not at work, sure enough,” said he, with a short, grim laugh. “Not at
what you call work. I were at the Committee, till I were sickened out
wi’ trying to make fools hear reason. I were fetched to Boucher’s wife
afore seven this morning. She’s bed-fast, but she were raving and raging
to know where her dunner-headed brute of a chap was, as if I’d to keep
him—as if he were fit to be ruled by me. The d—d fool, who has put his
foot in all our plans! And I’ve walked my feet sore wi’ going about for
to see men who wouldn’t be seen, now the law is raised against us. And I
were sore-hearted, too, which is worse than sore-footed; and if I did
see a friend who ossed to treat me, I never knew hoo lay a-dying here.
Bess, lass, thou’d believe me, thou wouldst—wouldstn’t thou?” turning
to the poor dumb form with wild appeal.

“I am sure,” said Margaret, “I am sure you did not know; it was quite
sudden. But, now, you see, it would be different; you do know; you do
see her lying there; you hear what she said with her last breath. You
will not go?”

No answer. In fact, where was he to look for comfort?

“Come home with me,” said she at last, with a bold venture, half
trembling at her own proposal as she made it. “At least you shall have
some comfortable food, which I’m sure you need.”

“Yo’r father’s a parson?” asked he, with a sudden turn in his ideas.

“He was,” said Margaret, shortly.

“I’ll go and take a dish o’ tea with him, since yo’ve asked me. I’ve
many a thing I often wished to say to a parson, and I’m not particular
as to whether he’s preaching now, or not.”

Margaret was perplexed; his drinking tea with her father, who would be
totally unprepared for his visitor—her mother so ill—seemed utterly
out of the question; and yet, if she drew back now, it would be worse
than ever—sure to drive him to the gin-shop. She thought that if she
could only get him to their own house, it was so great a step gained
that she would trust to the chapter of accidents for the next.

“Good-bye, ou’d wench! We’ve parted company at last, we have! But
thou’st been a blessin’ to thy father ever sin’ thou wert born. Bless
thy white lips, lass,—they’ve a smile on ’em now! and I’m glad to see
it once again, though I’m lone and forlorn for evermore.”

He stooped down and fondly kissed his daughter; covered up her face, and
turned to follow Margaret. She had hastily gone down stairs to tell
Mary of the arrangement; to say it was the only place she could think of
to keep him from the gin-palace; to urge Mary to come too, for her heart
smote her at the idea of leaving the poor affectionate girl alone. But
Mary had friends amongst the neighbours, she said, who would come in and
sit a bit with her; it was all right; but father—

He was there by them or she would have spoken more. He had shaken off
his emotion, as if he was ashamed of having ever given way to it; and
had even o’erleaped himself so much that he assumed a sort of bitter
mirth, like the crackling of thorns under a pot.

“I’m going to take my tea wi’ her father, I am.”

But he slouched his cap low down over his brow as he went out into the
street, and looked neither to the right nor to the left, while he
tramped along by Margaret’s side; he feared being upset by the words,
still more the looks, of sympathising neighbours. So he and Margaret
walked in silence.

As he got near the street in which he knew she lived, he looked down at
his clothes, his hands, his shoes.

“I should m’appen ha’ cleaned mysel’, first.”

It certainly would have been desirable, but Margaret assured him he
should be allowed to go into the yard, and have soap and towel provided;
she would not let him slip out of her hands just then.

While he followed the house-servant along the passage, and through the
kitchen, stepping cautiously on every dark mark in the pattern of the
oil-cloth, in order to conceal his dirty foot-prints, Margaret ran
upstairs. She met Dixon on the landing.

“How is mamma?—where is papa?”

Missus was tired, and gone into her own room. She had wanted to go to
bed, but Dixon had persuaded her to lie down on the sofa, and have her
tea brought to her there; it would be better than getting restless by
being too long in bed.

So far, so good. But where was Mr. Hale? In the drawing-room. Margaret
went in half breathless with the hurried story she had to tell. Of
course, she told it incompletely; and her father was rather “taken
aback” by the idea of the drunken weaver awaiting him in his quiet
study, with whom he was expected to drink tea, and on whose behalf
Margaret was anxiously pleading. The meek, kind-hearted Mr. Hale would
have readily tried to console him in his grief, but, unluckily, the
point Margaret dwelt upon most forcibly was the fact of his having been
drinking, and her having brought him home with her as a last expedient
to keep him from the gin-shop. One little event had come out of another
so naturally that Margaret was hardly conscious of what she had done,
till she saw the slight look of repugnance on her father’s face.

“Oh, papa! he really is a man you will not dislike—if you won’t be
shocked to begin with.”

“But, Margaret, to bring a drunken man home—and your mother so ill!”

Margaret’s countenance fell. “I am sorry, papa. He is very quiet—he is
not tipsy at all. He was only rather strange at first, but that might
be the shock of poor Bessy’s death.” Margaret’s eyes filled with tears.
Mr. Hale took hold of her sweet pleading face in both his hands, and
kissed her forehead.

“It is all right, dear. I’ll go and make him as comfortable as I can,
and do you attend to your mother. Only, if you can come in and make a
third in the study, I shall be glad.”

“Oh, yes—thank you.” But as Mr. Hale was leaving the room, she ran
after him.

“Papa—you must not wonder at what he says: he’s an——, I mean he does
not believe much in what we do.”

“Oh dear! a drunken infidel weaver!” said Mr. Hale to himself, in
dismay. But to Margaret he only said, “If your mother goes to sleep, be
sure you come directly.”

Margaret went into her mother’s room. Mrs. Hale lifted herself up from a
doze.

“When did you write to Frederick, Margaret? Yesterday, or the day
before?”

“Yesterday, mamma.”

“Yesterday, and the letter went?”

“Yes. I took it myself.”

“Oh, Margaret, I’m so afraid of his coming! If he should be recognized!
If he should be taken! If he should be executed, after all these years
that he has kept away and lived in safety! I keep falling asleep and
dreaming that he is caught and being tried.”

“Oh, mamma, don’t be afraid. There will be some risk, no doubt; but we
will lessen it as much as ever we can. And it is so little! Now, if we
were at Helstone, there would be twenty—a hundred times as much. There,
everybody would remember him; and if there was a stranger known to be in
the house, they would be sure to guess it was Frederick; while here,
nobody knows or cares for us enough to notice what we do. Dixon will
keep the door like a dragon—won’t you, Dixon—while he is here?”

“They’ll be clever if they come in past me!” said Dixon, showing her
teeth at the bare idea.

“And he need not go out, except in the dusk, poor fellow!”

“Poor fellow!” echoed Mrs. Hale. “But I almost wish you had not written.
Would it be too late to stop him if you wrote again, Margaret?”

“I’m afraid it would, mamma,” said Margaret, remembering the urgency
with which she had entreated him to come directly, if he wished to see
his mother alive.

“I always dislike that doing things in such a hurry,” said Mrs. Hale.

Margaret was silent.

“Come now, ma’am,” said Dixon, with a kind of cheerful authority, “you
know seeing Master Frederick is just the very thing of all others you’re
longing for. And I’m glad Miss Margaret wrote off straight, without
shilly-shallying. I’ve had a great mind to do it myself. And we’ll keep
him snug, depend upon it. There’s only Martha in the house that would
not do a good deal to save him on a pinch; and I’ve been thinking she
might go and see her mother just at that very time. She’s been saying
once or twice she should like to go, for her mother has had a stroke
since she came here; only she didn’t like to ask. But I’ll see about her
being safe off, as soon as we know when he comes, God bless him! So take
your tea, ma’am, in comfort, and trust to me.”

Mrs. Hale did trust in Dixon more than in Margaret. Dixon’s words
quieted her for the time. Margaret poured out the tea in silence, trying
to think of something agreeable to say; but her thoughts made answer
something like Daniel O’Rourke, when the man-in-the moon asked him to
get off his reaping-hook. “The more you ax us, the more we won’t stir.”
The more she tried to think of something—anything besides the danger to
which Frederick would be exposed—the more closely her imagination clung
to the unfortunate idea presented to her. Her mother prattled with
Dixon, and seemed to have utterly forgotten the possibility of Frederick
being tried and executed—utterly forgotten that at her wish, if by
Margaret’s deed, he was summoned into this danger. Her mother was one of
those who throw out terrible possibilities, miserable probabilities,
unfortunate chances of all kinds, as a rocket throws out sparks; but if
the sparks light on some combustible matter, they smoulder first, and
burst out into a frightful flame at last. Margaret was glad when, her
filial duties gently and carefully performed, she could go down into the
study. She wondered how her father and Higgins had got on.

In the first place, the decorous, kind-hearted, simple, old-fashioned
gentleman, had unconsciously called out, by his own refinement and
courteousness of manner, all the latent courtesy in the other.

Mr. Hale treated all his fellow-creatures alike: it never entered into
his head to make any difference because of their rank. He placed a chair
for Nicholas; stood up till he, at Mr. Hale’s request, took a seat; and
called him, invariably, “Mr. Higgins,” instead of the curt “Nicholas” or
“Higgins,” to which the “drunken infidel weaver” had been accustomed.
But Nicholas was neither an habitual drunkard nor a thorough infidel. He
drank to drown care, as he would have himself expressed it: and he was
infidel so far as he had never yet found any form of faith to which he
could attach himself, heart and soul.

Margaret was a little surprised, and very much pleased, when she found
her father and Higgins in earnest conversation—each speaking with
gentle politeness to the other, however their opinions might clash.
Nicholas—clean, tidied (if only at the pump-trough), and quiet
spoken—was a new creature to her, who had only seen him in the rough
independence of his own hearthstone. He had “slicked” his hair down with
the fresh water; he had adjusted his neck-handkerchief, and borrowed an
odd candle-end to polish his clogs with; and there he sat, enforcing
some opinion on her father, with a strong Darkshire accent, it is true,
but with a lowered voice, and a good, earnest composure on his face. Her
father, too, was interested in what his companion was saying. He looked
round as she came in, smiled, and quietly gave her his chair, and then
sat down afresh as quickly as possible, and with a little bow of apology
to his guest for the interruption. Higgins nodded to her as a sign of
greeting; and she softly adjusted her working materials on the table,
and prepared to listen.

“As I was a-saying, sir, I reckon yo’d not ha’ much belief in yo’ if yo’
lived here,—if yo’d been bred here. I ax your pardon if I use wrong
words; but what I mean by belief just now, is a-thinking on sayings and
maxims and promises made by folk yo’ never saw, about the things and the
life yo’ never saw, nor no one else. Now, yo’ say these are true things,
and true sayings, and a true life. I just say, where’s the proof?
There’s many and many a one wiser, and scores better learned than I am
around me,—folk who’ve had time to think on these things,—while my
time has had to be gi’en up to getting my bread. Well, I sees these
people. Their lives is pretty much open to me. They’re real folk. They
don’t believe i’ the Bible,—not they. They may say they do, for form’s
sake; but Lord, sir, d’ye think their first cry i’ th’ morning is, ‘What
shall I do to get hold on eternal life?’ or ‘What shall I do to fill my
purse this blessed day? Where shall I go? What bargains shall I strike?’
The purse and the gold and the notes is real things; things as can be
felt and touched; them’s realities; and eternal life is all a talk, very
fit for—I ax your pardon, sir; yo’r a parson out o’ work, I believe.
Well! I’ll never speak disrespectful of a man in the same fix as I’m in
mysel. But I’ll just ax yo’ another question, sir, and I dunnot want yo’
to answer it, only to put in yo’r pipe, and smoke it, afore yo’ go for
to set down us, who only believe in what we see, as fools and noddies.
If salvation, and life to come, and what not, was true—not in men’s
words, but in men’s hearts’ core—dun yo’ not think they’d din us wi’ it
as they do wi’ political ’conomy? They’re mighty anxious to come round
us wi’ that piece o’ wisdom; but t’other would be a greater convarsion,
if it were true.”

“But the masters have nothing to do with your religion. All that they
are connected with you in is trade,—so they think,—and all that it
concerns them, therefore, to rectify your opinions in is the science of
trade.”

“I’m glad, sir,” said Higgins, with a curious wink of his eye, “that yo’
put in, ‘so they think.’ I’d ha’ thought yo’ a hyprocrite, I’m afeard,
if yo’ hadn’t, for all yo’r a parson, or rayther because yo’r a parson.
Yo’ see, if yo’d spoken o’ religion as a thing that, if it was true, it
didn’t concern all men to press on all men’s attention, above everything
else in this ’varsal earth, I should ha’ thought yo’ a knave for to be a
parson; and I’d rather think yo’ a fool than a knave. No offence, I
hope, sir.”

“None at all. You consider me mistaken, and I consider you far more
fatally mistaken. I don’t expect to convince you in a day,—not in one
conversation; but let us know each other, and speak freely to each other
about these things, and the truth will prevail. I should not believe in
God if I did not believe that. Mr. Higgins, I trust, whatever else you
have given up, you believe”—(Mr. Hale’s voice dropped low in
reverence)—“you believe in Him.”

Nicholas Higgins suddenly stood straight, stiff up. Margaret started to
her feet,—for she thought, by the working of his face, he was going
into convulsions. Mr. Hale looked at her dismayed. At last Higgins found
words:

“Man! I could fell yo’ to the ground for tempting me. Whatten business
have yo’ to try me wi’ your doubts? Think o’ her lying theere, after the
life hoo’s led; and think then how yo’d deny me the one sole comfort
left—that there is a God, and that He set her her life. I dunnot
believe she’ll ever live again,” said he, sitting down, and drearily
going on, as if to the unsympathising fire. “I dunnot believe in any
other life than this, in which she dreed such trouble, and had such
never-ending care; and I cannot bear to think it were all a set o’
chances, that might ha’ been altered wi’ a breath o’ wind. There’s many
a time when I’ve thought I didna believe in God, but I’ve never put it
fair out before me in words, as many men do. I may ha’ laughed at those
who did, to brave it out like—but I have looked round at after, to see
if He heard me, if so be there was a He; but to-day, when I’m left
desolate, I wunnot listen to yo’ wi’ yo’r questions, and yo’r doubts.
There’s but one thing steady and quiet i’ all this reeling world, and,
reason or no reason, I’ll cling to that. It’s a’ very well for happy
folk”——

Margaret touched his arm very softly. She had not spoken before, nor had
he heard her rise.

“Nicholas, we do not want to reason; you misunderstand my father. We do
not reason—we believe; and so do you. It is the one sole comfort in
such times.”

He turned round and caught her hand. “Ay! it is, it is”—(brushing away
the tears with the back of his hand).—“But yo’ know, she’s lying dead
at home; and I’m welly dazed wi’ sorrow, and at times I hardly know what
I’m saying. It’s as if speeches folk ha’ made—clever and smart things
as I’ve thought at the time—come up now my heart’s welly brossen. Th’
strike’s failed as well; dun yo’ know that, miss? I were coming whoam to
ask her, like a beggar as I am, for a bit o’ comfort i’ that trouble;
and I were knocked down by one who telled me she were dead—just dead.
That were all; but that were enough for me.”

Mr. Hale blew his nose, and got up to snuff the candles in order to
conceal his emotion. “He’s not an infidel, Margaret; how could you say
so?” muttered he reproachfully. “I’ve a good mind to read him the
fourteenth chapter of Job.”

“Not yet, papa, I think. Perhaps not at all. Let us ask him about the
strike, and give him all the sympathy he needs, and hoped to have from
poor Bessy.”

So they questioned and listened. The workmen’s calculations were based
(like too many of the masters’) on false premises. They reckoned on
their fellow-men as if they possessed the calculable powers of machines,
no more, no less; no allowance for human passions getting the better of
reason, as in the case of Boucher and the rioters; and believing that
the representations of their injuries would have the same effect on
strangers far away, as the injuries (fancied or real) had upon
themselves. They were consequently surprised and indignant at the poor
Irish, who had allowed themselves to be imported and brought over to
take their places. This indignation was tempered in some degree, by
contempt for “them Irishers,” and by pleasure at the idea of the
bungling way in which they would set to work, and perplex their new
masters with their ignorance and stupidity, strange exaggerated stories
of which were already spreading through the town. But the most cruel cut
of all was that of the Milton workmen, who had defied and disobeyed the
commands of the Union to keep the peace, whatever came; who had
originated discord in the camp, and spread the panic of the law being
arrayed against them.

“And so the strike is at an end,” said Margaret.

“Ay, miss. It’s save as save can. Th’ factory doors will need open wide
to-morrow to let in all who’ll be axing for work; if it’s only just to
show they’d nought to do wi’ a measure, which if we’d been made o’ th’
right stuff would ha’ brought wages up to a point they’n not been at
this ten year.”

“You’ll get work, shan’t you?” asked Margaret. “You’re a famous workman,
are not you?”

“Hamper’ll let me work at his mill, when he cuts off his right hand—not
before, and not after,” said Nicholas, quietly. Margaret was silenced
and sad.

“About the wages,” said Mr. Hale. “You’ll not be offended, but I think
you make some sad mistakes. I should like to read you some remarks in a
book I have.” He got up and went to his bookshelves.

“Yo’ needn’t trouble yoursel’, sir,” said Nicholas. “Their book-stuff
goes in at one ear and out at t’other. I can make nought on’t. Afore
Hamper and me had this split, th’ overlooker telled him I were stirring
up th’ men to ask for higher wages; and Hamper met me one day in th’
yard. He’d a thin book i’ his hand, and says he, ‘Higgins, I’m told
you’re one o’ those damned fools that think you can get higher wages for
asking for ’em; ay, and keep ’em up too, when you’ve forced ’em up. Now,
I’ll give yo’ a chance and try if yo’ve any sense in yo’. Here’s a book
written by a friend o’ mine, and if yo’ll read it yo’ll see how wages
find their own level, without either masters or men having aught to do
with them; except the men cut their own throats wi’ striking, like the
confounded noodles they are.’ Well, now, sir, I put it to yo’, being a
parson, and having been in th’ preaching line, and having had to try and
bring folk o’er to what yo’ thought was a right way o’ thinking—did yo’
begin by calling ’em fools and such like, or didn’t yo’ rayther give ’em
such kind words at first, to make ’em ready for to listen and be
convinced, if they could; and in yo’r preaching, did yo’ stop every now
and then, and say, half to them and half to yo’rsel’, ‘But yo’r such a
pack o’ fools, that I’ve a strong notion it’s no use my trying to put
sense into yo’?’ I were not i’ th’ best state, I’ll own, for taking in
what Hamper’s friend had to say—I were so vexed at the way it were put
to me;—but I thought, ‘Come, I’ll see what these chaps has got to say,
and try if it’s them or me as is th’ noodle.’ So I took th’ book and
tugged at it; but, Lord bless yo’, it went on about capital and labour,
and labour and capital, till it fair sent me off to sleep. I ne’er could
rightly fix i’ my mind which was which; and it spoke on ’em as if they
was vartues or vices; and what I wanted for to know were the rights o’
men, whether they were rich or poor—so be they only were men.”

“But for all that,” said Mr. Hale, “and granting to the full the
offensiveness, the folly, the unchristianness of Mr. Hamper’s way of
speaking to you in recommending his friend’s book, yet if it told you
what he said it did, that wages find their own level, and that the most
successful strike can only force them up for a moment, to sink in far
greater proportion afterwards, in consequence of that very strike, the
book would have told you the truth.”

“Well, sir,” said Higgins, rather doggedly; “it might, or it might not.
There’s two opinions go to settling that point. But suppose it was truth
double strong, it were no truth to me if I couldna take it in. I daresay
there’s great truth in yon Latin book on your shelves; but it’s
gibberish and not truth to me, unless I know the meaning o’ the words.
If yo’, sir, or any other knowledgable, patient man comes to me, and
says he’ll larn me what the words mean, and not blow me up if I’m a bit
stupid, or forget how one thing hangs on another—why, in time I may get
to see the truth of it; or I may not. I’ll not be bound to say I shall
end in thinking the same as any man. And I’m not one who think truth can
be shaped out in words, all neat and clean, as th’ men at th’ foundry
cut out sheet-iron. Same bones won’t go down wi’ every one. It’ll stick
here i’ this man’s throat, and there i’ t’others. Let alone that, when
down, it may be too strong for this one, too weak for that. Folk who
sets up to doctor th’ world wi’ their truth, mun suit different for
different minds; and be a bit tender i’ th’ way of giving it too, or the
poor sick fools may spit it out i’ their faces. Now Hamper first gi’es
me a box on my ear, and then he throws his big bolus at me, and says he
reckons it’ll do me no good, I’m such a fool, but there it is.”

“I wish some of the kindest and wisest of the masters would meet some of
you men, and have a good talk on these things; it would, surely, be the
best way of getting over your difficulties, which, I do believe, arise
from your ignorance—excuse me, Mr. Higgins—on subjects which it is for
the mutual interests of both masters and men should be well understood
by both. I wonder”—(half to his daughter) “if Mr. Thornton might not
be induced to do such thing?”

“Remember, papa,” said she in a very low voice, “what he said one
day,—about governments, you know.” She was unwilling to make any
clearer allusion to the conversation they had held on the mode of
governing work-people—by giving men intelligence enough to rule
themselves, or by a wise despotism on the part of the master—for she
saw that Higgins had caught Mr. Thornton’s name, if not the whole of the
speech: indeed, he began to speak of him.

“Thornton! He’s the chap as wrote off at once for these Irishers; and
led to th’ riot that ruined th’ strike. Even Hamper wi’ all his
bullying, would ha’ waited a while—but it’s a word and a blow wi’
Thornton. And, now, when th’ Union would ha’ thanked him for following
up th’ chase after Boucher, and them chaps as went right again our
commands, it’s Thornton who steps forrard and coolly says that, as th’
strike’s at an end, he, as party injured, doesn’t want to press the
charge again the rioters. I thought he’d ha’ carried his point, and had
his revenge in an open way; but says he (one in court telled me his very
words) ‘they are well known; they will find the natural punishment of
their conduct, in the difficulty they will meet wi’ in getting
employment. That will be severe enough.’ I only wish they’d cotched
Boucher, and had him up before Hamper. I see th’ oud tiger setting on
him! would he ha’ let him off? Not he!”

“Mr. Thornton was right,” said Margaret. “You are angry against Boucher,
Nicholas; or else you would be the first to see, that where the natural
punishment would be severe enough for the offence, any farther
punishment would be something like revenge.”

“My daughter is no great friend of Mr. Thornton’s,” said Mr. Hale,
smiling at Margaret; while she, as red as any carnation, began to work
with double diligence, “but I believe what she says is the truth. I like
him for it.”

“Well, sir, this strike has been a weary bit o’ business to me; and
yo’ll not wonder if I’m a bit put out wi’ seeing it fail, just for a few
men who would na suffer in silence, and aou’d out, brave and firm.”

“You forget!” said Margaret. “I don’t know much of Boucher; but the only
time I saw him it was not his own sufferings he spoke of, but those of
his sick wife—his little children.”

“True! but he were not made of iron himsel’. He’d ha’ cried out for his
own sorrows, next. He were not one to bear.”

“How came he into the Union?” asked Margaret innocently. “You don’t seem
to have much respect for him; nor gained much good from having him in.”

Higgins’s brow clouded. He was silent for a minute or two. Then he said,
shortly enough:

“It’s not for me to speak o’ th’ Union. What they does they does. Them
that is of a trade mun hang together; and if they’re not willing to take
their chance along wi’ th’ rest, th’ Union has ways and means.”

Mr. Hale saw that Higgins was vexed at the turn the conversation had
taken, and was silent. Not so Margaret, though she saw Higgins’s feeling
as clearly as he did. By instinct she felt that if he could but be
brought to express himself in plain words, something clear would be
gained on which to argue for the right and the just.

“And what are the Union’s ways and means?”

He looked up at her, as if on the point of dogged resistance to her
wish for information. But her calm face, fixed on his, patient and
trustful, compelled him to answer.

“Well! If a man doesn’t belong to th’ Union, them as works next looms as
orders not to speak to him—if he’s sorry or ill it’s a’ the same; he’s
out o’ bounds; he’s none o’ us; he comes among us, he works among us,
but he’s none o’ us. I’ some places them’s fined who speaks to him. Yo’
try that, miss; try living a year or two among them as looks away if yo’
look at ’em; try working within two yards o’ crowds o’ men, who, yo’
know, have a grinding grudge at yo’ in their hearts—to whom if yo’ say
yo’r glad, not an eye brightens, nor a lip moves,—to whom if your
heart’s heavy, yo’ can never say nought, because they’ll ne’er take
notice on your sighs or sad looks (and a man’s no man who’ll groan out
loud ’bout folk asking him what’s the matter?)—just yo’ try that,
miss—ten hours for three hundred days, and yo’ll know a bit what the
Union is.”

“Why!” said Margaret, “what tyranny this is! Nay, Higgins, I don’t care
one straw for your anger. I know you can’t be angry with me if you
would, and I must tell you the truth: that I never read, in all the
history I have read, of a more slow, lingering torture than this. And
you belong to the Union! And you talk of the tyranny of the masters!”

“Nay,” said Higgins, “yo’ may say what yo’ like. The dead stand between
yo’ and every angry word o’ mine. D’ye think I forget who’s lying
_there_, and how hoo loved yo’? And it’s th’ masters as has made us sin,
if th’ Union is a sin. Not this generation maybe, but their fathers.
Their fathers ground our fathers to the very dust; ground us to powder!
Parson! I reckon I’ve heerd my mother read out a text, ‘The fathers have
eaten sour grapes, and th’ chidren’s teeth are set on edge.’ Its so wi’
them. In those days of sore oppression th’ Unions began; it were a
necessity. It’s a necessity now, according to me. It’s a withstanding of
injustice, past, present, or to come. It may be like war; along wi’ it
come crimes; but I think it were a greater crime to let it alone. Our
only chance is binding men together in one common interest; and if some
are cowards and some are fools, they mun come along and join the great
march, whose only strength is in numbers.”

“Oh!” said Mr. Hale, sighing, “your Union in itself would be beautiful,
glorious—it would be Christianity itself—if it were but for an end
which affected the good of all, instead of that of merely one class as
opposed to another.”

“I reckon it’s time for me to be going, sir,” said Higgins, as the clock
struck ten.

“Home?” said Margaret very softly. He understood her, and took her
offered hand. “Home, miss. Yo’ may trust me, tho’ I am one o’ th’
Union.”

“I do trust you most thoroughly, Nicholas.”

“Stay!” said Mr. Hale, hurrying to the bookshelves. “Mr. Higgins! I’m
sure you’ll join us in family prayer?”

Higgins looked at Margaret, doubtfully. Her grave sweet eyes met his;
there was no compulsion, only deep interest in them. He did not speak,
but he kept his place.

Margaret the Churchwoman, her father the Dissenter, Higgins the Infidel,
knelt down together. It did them no harm.




CHAPTER XXIX.

A RAY OF SUNSHINE.

    “Some wishes crossed my mind and dimly cheered it,
    And one or two poor melancholy pleasures,
    Each in the pale unwarming light of hope,
    Silvering its flimsy wing, flew silent by—
    Moths in the moonbeam!”
              COLERIDGE.


The next morning brought Margaret a letter from Edith. It was
affectionate and inconsequent like the writer. But the affection was
charming to Margaret’s own affectionate nature; and she had grown up
with the inconsequence, so she did not perceive it. It was as follows:—

“Oh, Margaret, it is worth a journey from England to see my boy! He is a
superb little fellow, especially in his caps, and most especially in the
one you sent him, you good, dainty-fingered, persevering little lady!
Having made all the mothers here envious, I want to show him to somebody
new, and hear a fresh set of admiring expressions; perhaps, that’s all
the reason; perhaps it is not—nay, possibly, there is just a little
cousinly love mixed with it; but I do want you so much to come here,
Margaret! I’m sure it would be the very best thing for Aunt Hale’s
health; everybody here is young and well, and our skies are always blue,
and our sun always shines, and the band plays deliciously from morning
till night; and, to come back to the burden of my ditty, my baby always
smiles. I am constantly wanting you to draw him from me, Margaret. It
does not signify what he is doing; that very thing is prettiest,
gracefullest, best. I think I love him a great deal better than my
husband, who is getting stout, and grumpy—what he calls ‘busy.’ No! he
is not. He has just come in with news of such a charming picnic, given
by the officers of the Hazard, at anchor in the bay below. Because he
has brought in such a pleasant piece of news, I retract all I said just
now. Did not somebody burn his hand for having said or done something he
was sorry for? Well, I can’t burn mine, because it would hurt me, and
the scar would be ugly; but I’ll retract all I said as fast as I can.
Cosmo is quite as great a darling as baby, and not a bit stout, and as
ungrumpy as ever husband was; only, sometimes he is very, very busy. I
may say that without love—wifely duty— where was I?—I had something
very particular to say, I know, once. Oh, it is this—Dearest
Margaret!—you must come and see me; it would do Aunt Hale good, as I
said before. Get the doctor to order it for her. Tell him that it’s the
smoke of Milton that does her harm. I have no doubt it is that, really.
Three months (you must not come for less) of this delicious climate—all
sunshine, and grapes as common as blackberries, would quite cure her. I
don’t ask my uncle”—(Here the letter became more constrained, and
better written. Mr. Hale was in the corner, like a naughty child, for
having given up his living.)—“because, I dare say, he disapproves of
war, soldiers, and bands of music; at least, I know that many Dissenters
are members of the Peace Society, and I am afraid he would not like to
come; but, if he would, dear, pray say that Cosmo and I will do our best
to make him happy; and I’ll hide up Cosmo’s red coat and sword, and make
the band play all sorts of grave, solemn things; or, if they do play
pomps and vanities, it shall be in double slow time. Dear Margaret, if
he would like to accompany you and Aunt Hale, we will try and make it
pleasant, though I’m rather afraid of any one who has done anything for
conscience’ sake. You never did, I hope. Tell Aunt Hale not to bring any
warm clothes, though I’m afraid it will be late in the year before you
can come. But you have no idea of the heat here! I tried to wear my
great beauty Indian shawl at a picnic. I kept myself up with proverbs
as long as I could; ‘Pride must abide,’—and such wholesome pieces of
pith; but it was no use. I was like mamma’s little dog Tiny with an
elephant’s trappings on; smothered, hidden, killed with my finery; so I
made it into a capital carpet for us all to sit down upon. Here’s this
boy of mine, Margaret—if you don’t pack up your things as soon as you
get this letter, and come straight off to see him, I shall think you’re
descended from King Herod!”

Margaret did long for a day of Edith’s life—her freedom from care, her
cheerful home, her sunny skies. If a wish could have transported her,
she would have gone off; just for one day. She yearned for the strength
which such a change would give—even for a few hours to be in the midst
of that bright life, and to feel young again. Not yet twenty! and she
had had to bear up against such hard pressure that she felt quite old.
That was her first feeling after reading Edith’s letter. Then she read
it again, and, forgetting herself, was amused at its likeness to Edith’s
self, and was laughing merrily over it when Mrs. Hale came into the
drawing-room, leaning on Dixon’s arm. Margaret flew to adjust the
pillows. Her mother seemed more than usually feeble.

“What were you laughing at, Margaret?” asked she, as soon as she had
recovered from the exertion of settling herself on the sofa.

“A letter I have had this morning from Edith. Shall I read it to you,
mamma?”

She read it aloud, and for a time it seemed to interest her mother, who
kept wondering what name Edith had given to her boy, and suggesting all
probable names, and all possible reasons why each and all of these names
should be given. Into the very midst of these wonders Mr. Thornton came,
bringing another offering of fruit for Mrs. Hale. He could not—say
rather, he would not—deny himself the chance of the pleasure of seeing
Margaret. He had no end in this but the present gratification. It was
the sturdy wilfulness of a man usually most reasonable and
self-controlled. He entered the room, taking in at a glance the fact of
Margaret’s presence; but after the first cold distant bow, he never
seemed to let his eyes fall on her again. He only stayed to present his
peaches—to speak some gentle kindly words—and then his cold offended
eyes met Margaret’s with a grave farewell, as he left the room. She sat
down silent and pale.

“Do you know, Margaret, I really begin to like Mr. Thornton.”

No answer at first. Then Margaret forced out an icy “Do you?”

“Yes! I think he is really getting quite polished in his manners.”

Margaret’s voice was more in order now. She replied,
“He is very kind and attentive—there is no doubt of that.”

“I wonder Mrs. Thornton never calls. She must know I am ill, because of
the water-bed.”

“I dare say, she hears how you are from her son.”

“Still, I should like to see her. You have so few friends here,
Margaret.”

Margaret felt what was in her mother’s thoughts—a tender craving to
bespeak the kindness of some woman towards the daughter that might soon
be left motherless. But she could not speak.

“Do you think,” said Mrs. Hale, after a pause, “that you could go and
ask Mrs. Thornton to come and see me? Only once—I don’t want to be
troublesome.”

“I will do anything, if you wish it, mamma—but if—but when Frederick
comes——”

“Ah, to be sure! we must keep our doors shut—we must let no one in. I
hardly know whether I dare wish him to come or not. Sometimes I think I
would rather not. Sometimes I have such frightful dreams about him.”

“Oh, mamma! we’ll take good care. I will put my arm in the bolt sooner
than he should come to the slightest harm. Trust the care of him to me,
mamma. I will watch over him like a lioness over her young.”

“When can we hear from him?”

“Not for a week yet, certainly—perhaps more.”

“We must send Martha away in good time. It would never do to have her
here when he comes, and then send her off in a hurry.”

“Dixon is sure to remind us of that. I was thinking that, if we wanted
any help in the house while he is here, we could perhaps get Mary
Higgins. She is very slack of work, and is a good girl, and would take
pains to do her best, I am sure, and would sleep at home, and need never
come upstairs, so as to know who is in the house.”

“As you please. As Dixon pleases. But, Margaret, don’t get to use these
horrid Milton words. ‘Slack of work:’ it is a provincialism. What will
your aunt Shaw say, if she hears you use it on her return?”

“Oh, mamma! don’t try and make a bugbear of aunt Shaw,” said Margaret,
laughing. “Edith picked up all sorts of military slang from Captain
Lennox, and aunt Shaw never took any notice of it.”

“But yours is factory slang.”

“And if I live in a factory town, I must speak factory language when I
want it. Why, mamma, I could astonish you with a great many words you
never heard in your life. I don’t believe you know what a knobstick is.”

“Not I, child. I only know it has a very vulgar sound; and I don’t want
to hear you using it.”

“Very well, dearest mother, I won’t. Only I shall have to use a whole
explanatory sentence instead.”

“I don’t like this Milton,” said Mrs. Hale. “Edith is right enough in
saying it’s the smoke that has made me so ill.”

Margaret started up as her mother said this. Her father had just entered
the room, and she was most anxious that the faint impression she had
seen on his mind that the Milton air had injured her mother’s health,
should not be deepened—should not receive any confirmation. She could
not tell whether he had heard what Mrs. Hale had said or not; but she
began speaking hurriedly of other things, unaware that Mr. Thornton was
following him.

“Mamma is accusing me of having picked up a great deal of vulgarity
since we came to Milton.”

The “vulgarity” Margaret spoke of, referred purely to the use of local
words, and the expression arose out of the conversation they had just
been holding. But Mr. Thornton’s brow darkened; and Margaret suddenly
felt how her speech might be misunderstood by him; so, in the natural
sweet desire to avoid giving unnecessary pain, she forced herself to go
forwards with a little greeting, and continue what she was saying,
addressing herself to him expressly.

“Now, Mr. Thornton, though ‘knobstick’ has not a very pretty sound, is
it not expressive? Could I do without it, in speaking of the thing it
represents? If using local words is vulgar, I was very vulgar in the
Forest,—was I not, mamma?”

It was unusual with Margaret to obtrude her own subject of conversation
on others; but, in this case, she was so anxious to prevent Mr. Thornton
from feeling annoyance at the words he had accidentally overheard, that
it was not until she had done speaking that she coloured all over with
consciousness, more especially as Mr. Thornton seemed hardly to
understand the exact gist or bearing of what she was saying, but passed
her by, with a cold reserve of ceremonious movement, to speak to Mrs.
Hale.

The sight of him reminded her of the wish to see his mother, and commend
Margaret to her care. Margaret, sitting in burning silence, vexed and
ashamed of her difficulty in keeping her right place, and her calm
unconsciousness of heart, when Mr. Thornton was by, heard her mother’s
slow entreaty that Mrs. Thornton would come and see her; see her soon;
to-morrow, if it were possible. Mr. Thornton promised that she
should—conversed a little, and then took his leave; and Margaret’s
movements and voice seemed at once released from some invisible chains.
He never looked at her; and yet, the careful avoidance of his eyes
betokened that in some way he knew exactly where, if they fell by
chance, they would rest on her. If she spoke, he gave no sign of
attention, and yet his next speech to any one else was modified by what
she had said; sometimes there was an express answer to what she had
remarked, but given to another person as though unsuggested by her. It
was not the bad manners of ignorance; it was the wilful bad manners
arising from deep offence. It was wilful at the time; repented of
afterwards. But no deep plan, no careful cunning could have stood him in
such good stead. Margaret thought about him more than she had ever done
before; not with any tinge of what is called love, but with regret that
she had wounded him so deeply,—and with a gentle, patient striving to
return to their former position of antagonistic friendship; for a
friend’s position was what she found that he had held in her regard, as
well as in that of the rest of the family. There was a pretty humility
in her behaviour to him, as if mutely apologising for the over-strong
words which were the reaction from the deeds of the day of the riot.

But he resented those words bitterly. They rung in his ears; and he was
proud of the sense of justice which made him go in every kindness he
could offer to her parents. He exulted in the power he showed in
compelling himself to face her, whenever he could think of any action
which might give her father or mother pleasure. He thought that he
disliked seeing one who had mortified him so keenly; but he was
mistaken. It was a stinging pleasure to be in the room with her, and
feel her presence. But he was no great analyser of his own motives and
was mistaken, as I have said.




CHAPTER XXX.

HOME AT LAST.

    “The saddest birds a season find to sing.”
              SOUTHWELL.

    “Never to fold the robe o’er secret pain,
    Never, weighed down by memory’s clouds again,
    To bow thy head! Thou art gone home!”
              MRS. HEMANS.


Mrs. Thornton came to see Mrs. Hale the next morning. She was much
worse. One of those sudden changes—those great visible strides towards
death, had been taken in the night, and her own family were startled by
the gray sunken look her features had assumed in that one twelve hours
of suffering. Mrs. Thornton—who had not seen her for weeks—was
softened all at once. She had come because her son asked it from her as
a personal favour, but with all the proud bitter feelings of her nature
in arms against that family of which Margaret formed one. She doubted
the reality of Mrs. Hale’s illness; she doubted any want beyond a
momentary fancy on that lady’s part, which should take her out of her
previously settled course of employment for the day. She told her son
that she wished they had never come near the place; that he had never
got acquainted with them; that there had been no such useless languages
as Latin and Greek ever invented. He bore all this pretty silently; but
when she had ended her invective against the dead languages, he quietly
returned to the short, curt, decided expression of his wish that she
should go and see Mrs. Hale at the time appointed, as most likely to be
convenient to the invalid. Mrs. Thornton submitted with as bad a grace
as she could to her son’s desire, all the time liking him the better for
having it; and exaggerating in her own mind the same notion that he had
of extraordinary goodness on his part in so perseveringly keeping up
with the Hales.

His goodness verging on weakness (as all the softer virtues did in her
mind), and her own contempt for Mr. and Mrs. Hale, and positive dislike
to Margaret, were the ideas which occupied Mrs. Thornton, till she was
struck into nothingness before the dark shadow of the wings of the angel
of death. There lay Mrs. Hale—a mother like herself—a much younger
woman than she was,—on the bed from which there was no sign of hope
that she might ever rise again. No more variety of light and shade for
her in that darkened room; no power of action, scarcely change of
movement; faint alternations of whispered sound and studious silence;
and yet that monotonous life seemed almost too much! When Mrs. Thornton,
strong and prosperous with life, came in, Mrs. Hale lay still, although
from the look on her face she was evidently conscious of who it was. But
she did not even open her eyes for a minute or two. The heavy moisture
of tears stood on her eyelashes before she looked up; then, with her
hand groping feebly over the bed-clothes, for the touch of Mrs.
Thornton’s large firm fingers, she said, scarcely above her
breath.—Mrs. Thornton had to stoop from her erectness to listen,—

“Margaret—you have a daughter—my sister is in Italy. My child will be
without a mother;—in a strange place,—if I die— will you”——

And her filmy wandering eyes fixed themselves with an intensity of
wistfulness on Mrs. Thornton’s face. For a minute there was no change in
its rigidness; it was stern and unmoved;—nay, but that the eyes of the
sick woman were growing dim with the slow-gathering tears, she might
have seen a dark cloud cross the cold features. And it was no thought of
her son, or of her living daughter Fanny, that stirred her heart at
last; but a sudden remembrance, suggested by something in the
arrangement of the room,—of a little daughter—dead in infancy—long
years ago—that, like a sudden sunbeam, melted the icy crust, behind
which there was a real tender woman.

“You wish me to be a friend to Miss Hale,” said Mrs. Thornton, in her
measured voice, that would not soften with her heart, but came out
distinct and clear.

Mrs. Hale, her eyes still fixed on Mrs. Thornton’s face, pressed the
hand that lay below hers on the coverlet. She could not speak. Mrs.
Thornton sighed, “I will be a true friend, if circumstances require it.
Not a tender friend. That I cannot be,”—(“to her,” she was on the
point of adding, but she relented at the sight of that poor, anxious
face.)—“It is not my nature to show affection even where I feel it, nor
do I volunteer advice in general. Still, at your request,—if it will be
any comfort to you, I will promise you.” Then came a pause. Mrs.
Thornton was too conscientious to promise what she did not mean to
perform; and to perform anything in the way of kindness on behalf of
Margaret, more disliked at this moment than ever, was difficult; almost
impossible.

“I promise,” said she, with grave severity; which, after all, inspired
the dying woman with faith as in something more stable than life
itself,—flickering, flittering, wavering life! “I promise that in any
difficulty in which Miss Hale”——

“Call her Margaret!” gasped Mrs. Hale.

“In which she comes to me for help, I will help her with every power I
have, as if she were my own daughter. I also promise that if ever I see
her doing what I think is wrong”——

“But Margaret never does wrong—not wilfully wrong,” pleaded Mrs. Hale.
Mrs. Thornton went on as before; as if she had not heard:

“If ever I see her doing what I believe to be wrong—such wrong not
touching me or mine, in which case I might be supposed to have an
interested motive—I will tell her of it, faithfully and plainly, as I
should wish my own daughter to be told.”

There was a long pause. Mrs. Hale felt that this promise did not include
all; and yet it was much. It had reservations in it which she did not
understand: but then she was weak, dizzy, and tired. Mrs. Thornton was
reviewing all the probable cases in which she had pledged herself to
act. She had a fierce pleasure in the idea of telling Margaret unwelcome
truths, in the shape of performance of duty. Mrs. Hale began to speak:

“I thank you. I pray God to bless you. I shall never see you again in
this world. But my last words are, I thank you for your promise of
kindness to my child.”

“Not kindness!” testified Mrs. Thornton, ungraciously truthful to the
last. But having eased her conscience by saying these words, she was not
sorry that they were not heard. She pressed Mrs. Hale’s soft languid
hand; and rose up and went her way out of the house without seeing a
creature.

During the time that Mrs. Thornton was having this interview with Mrs.
Hale, Margaret and Dixon were laying their heads together and consulting
how they should keep Frederick’s coming a profound secret to all out of
the house. A letter from him might now be expected any day; and he would
assuredly follow quickly on its heels. Martha must be sent away on her
holiday; Dixon must keep stern guard on the front door, only admitting
the few visitors that ever came to the house into Mr. Hale’s room down
stairs—Mrs. Hale’s extreme illness giving her a good excuse for this.
If Mary Higgins was required as a help to Dixon in the kitchen, she was
to hear and see as little of Frederick as possible; and he was, if
necessary, to be spoken of to her under the name of Mr. Dickinson. But
her sluggish and incurious nature was the greatest safeguard of all.

They resolved that Martha should leave them that very afternoon for this
visit to her mother. Margaret wished that she had been sent away on the
previous day, as she fancied it might be thought strange to give a
servant a holiday when her mistress’s state required so much attendance.

Poor Margaret! All that afternoon she had to act the part of a Roman
daughter, and give strength out of her own scanty stock to her father.
Mr. Hale would hope, would not despair, between the attacks of his
wife’s malady; he buoyed himself up in every respite from her pain, and
believed that it was the beginning of ultimate recovery. And so, when
the paroxysms came on, each more severe than the last, they were fresh
agonies, and greater disappointments to him. This afternoon, he sat in
the drawing-room, unable to bear the solitude of his study, or to employ
himself in any way. He buried his head in his arms, which lay folded on
the table. Margaret’s heart ached to see him; yet, as he did not speak,
she did not like to volunteer any attempt at comfort. Martha was gone.
Dixon sat with Mrs. Hale while she slept. The house was very still and
quiet, and darkness came on, without any movement to procure candles.
Margaret sat at the window, looking out at the lamps and the street, but
seeing nothing,—only alive to her father’s heavy sighs. She did not
like to go down for lights, lest the tacit restraint of her presence
being withdrawn, he might give way to more violent emotion, without her
being at hand to comfort him. Yet she was just thinking that she ought
to go and see after the well-doing of the kitchen fire, which there was
nobody but herself to attend to, when she heard the muffled door-bell
ring with so violent a pull, that the wires jingled all through the
house, though the positive sound was not great. She started up, passed
her father, who had never moved at the veiled, dull sound,—returned,
and kissed him tenderly. And still he never moved, nor took any notice
of her fond embrace. Then she went down softly, through the dark, to the
door. Dixon would have put the chain on before she opened it, but
Margaret had not a thought of fear in her pre-occupied mind. A man’s
tall figure stood between her and the luminous street. He was looking
away; but at the sound of the latch he turned quickly round.

“Is this Mr. Hale’s?” said he, in a clear, full, delicate voice.

Margaret trembled all over; at first she did not answer. In a moment she
sighed out,

“Frederick!” and stretched out both her hands to catch his, and draw him
in.

“Oh, Margaret!” said he, holding her off by her shoulders, after they
had kissed each other, as if even in that darkness he could see her
face, and read in its expression a quicker answer to his question than
words could give,—

“My mother! is she alive!”

“Yes, she is alive, dear, dear brother! She—as ill as she can be she
is; but alive! She is alive!”

“Thank God!” said he.

“Papa is utterly prostrate with this great grief.”

“You expect me, don’t you?”

“No, we have had no letter.”

“Then I have come before it. But my mother knows I am coming.”

“Oh! we all knew you would come. But wait a little! Step in here. Give
me your hand. What is this? Oh! your carpet-bag. Dixon has shut the
shutters; but this is papa’s study, and I can take you to a chair to
rest yourself for a few minutes; while I go and tell him.”

She groped her way to the taper and the lucifer matches. She suddenly
felt shy when the little feeble light made them visible. All she could
see was, that her brother’s face was unusually dark in complexion, and
she caught the stealthy look of a pair of remarkably long-cut blue eyes,
that suddenly twinkled up with a droll consciousness of their mutual
purpose of inspecting each other. But though the brother and sister had
an instant of sympathy in their reciprocal glances, they did not
exchange a word; only, Margaret felt sure that she should like her
brother as a companion as much as she already loved him as a near
relation. Her heart was wonderfully lighter as she went up stairs; the
sorrow was no less in reality, but it became less oppressive from having
some one in precisely the same relation to it as that in which she
stood. Not her father’s desponding attitude had power to damp her now.
He lay across the table, helpless as ever; but she had the spell by
which to rouse him. She used it perhaps too violently in her own great
relief.

“Papa,” said she, throwing her arms fondly round his neck; pulling his
weary head up in fact with her gentle violence, till it rested in her
arms, and she could look into his eyes, and let them gain strength and
assurance from hers.

“Papa! guess who is here!”

He looked at her; she saw the idea of the truth glimmer into their filmy
sadness, and be dismissed thence as a wild imagination.

He threw himself forward, and hid his face once more in his
stretched-out arms, resting upon the table as heretofore. She heard him
whisper; she bent tenderly down to listen. “I don’t know; don’t tell me
it is Frederick—not Frederick. I cannot bear it,—I am too weak. And
his mother is dying!”

He began to cry and wail like a child. It was so different to all which
Margaret had hoped and expected, that she turned sick with
disappointment, and was silent for an instant. Then she spoke
again—very differently—not so exultingly, far more tenderly and
carefully.

“Papa, it is Frederick! Think of mamma, how glad she will be! And oh,
for her sake, how glad we ought to be! For his sake, too,—our poor,
poor boy!”

Her father did not change his attitude, but he seemed to be trying to
understand the fact.

“Where is he?” asked he at last, his face still hidden in his prostrate
arms.

“In your study, quite alone. I lighted the taper, and ran up to tell
you. He is quite alone, and will be wondering why—”

“I will go to him,” broke in her father; and he lifted himself up and
leant on her arm as on that of a guide.

Margaret led him to the study door, but her spirits were so agitated
that she felt she could not bear to see the meeting. She turned away,
and ran up stairs, and cried most heartily. It was the first time she
had dared to allow herself this relief for days. The strain had been
terrible, as she now felt. But Frederick was come! He, the one precious
brother, was there, safe, amongst them again! She could hardly believe
it. She stopped her crying, and opened her bedroom door. She heard no
sound of voices, and almost feared she might have dreamt. She went down
stairs, and listened at the study door. She heard the buzz of voices;
and that was enough. She went into the kitchen, and stirred up the fire,
and lighted the house, and prepared for the wanderer’s refreshment. How
fortunate it was that her mother slept! She knew that she did, from the
candle-lighter thrust through the keyhole of her bedroom door. The
traveller could be refreshed and bright, and the first excitement of the
meeting with his father all be over, before her mother became aware of
anything unusual.

When all was ready, Margaret opened the study door, and went in like a
serving-maiden, with a heavy tray held in her extended arms. She was
proud of serving Frederick. But he, when he saw her, sprang up in a
minute, and relieved her of her burden. It was a type, a sign, of all
the coming relief which his presence would bring. The brother and sister
arranged the table together, saying little, but their hands touching,
and their eyes speaking the natural language of expression, so
intelligible to those of the same blood. The fire had gone out; and
Margaret applied herself to light it, for the evenings had begun to be
chilly; and yet it was desirable to make all noises as distant as
possible from Mrs. Hale’s room.

“Dixon says it is a gift to light a fire; not an art to be acquired.”

“Poeta nascitur, non fit,” murmured Mr. Hale; and Margaret was glad to
hear a quotation once more, however languidly given.

“Dear old Dixon! How we shall kiss each other!” said Frederick. “She
used to kiss me, and then look in my face to be sure I was the right
person, and then set to again! But, Margaret, what a bungler you are! I
never saw such a little awkward, good-for-nothing pair of hands. Run
away, and wash them, ready to cut bread-and-butter for me, and leave the
fire. I’ll manage it. Lighting fires is one of my natural
accomplishments.”

So Margaret went away; and returned; and passed in and out of the room,
in a glad restlessness that could not be satisfied with sitting still.
The more wants Frederick had, the better she was pleased; and he
understood all this by instinct. It was a joy snatched in the house of
mourning, and the zest of it was all the more pungent, because they
knew in the depth of their hearts what irremediable sorrow awaited them.

In the middle, they heard Dixon’s foot on the stairs. Mr. Hale started
from his languid posture in his great arm-chair, from which he had been
watching his children in a dreamy way, as if they were acting some drama
of happiness, which it was pretty to look at, but which was distinct
from reality, and in which he had no part. He stood up, and faced the
door, showing such a strange, sudden anxiety to conceal Frederick from
the sight of any person entering, even though it were the faithful
Dixon, that a shiver came over Margaret’s heart: it reminded her of the
new fear in their lives. She caught at Frederick’s arm, and clutched it
tight, while a stern thought compressed her brow, and caused her to set
her teeth. And yet they knew it was only Dixon’s measured tread. They
heard her walk the length of the passage,—into the kitchen. Margaret
rose up.

“I will go to her, and tell her. And I shall hear how mamma is.” Mrs.
Hale was awake. She rambled at first; but after they had given her some
tea she was refreshed, though not disposed to talk. It was better that
the night should pass over before she was told of her son’s arrival. Dr.
Donaldson’s appointed visit would bring nervous excitement enough for
the evening; and he might tell them how to prepare her for seeing
Frederick. He was there, in the house; could be summoned at any moment.

Margaret could not sit still. It was a relief to her to aid Dixon in all
her preparations for “Master Frederick.” It seemed as though she never
could be tired again. Each glimpse into the room where he sate by his
father, conversing with him, about, she knew not what, nor cared to
know,—was increase of strength to her. Her own time for talking and
hearing would come at last, and she was too certain of this to feel in a
hurry to grasp it now. She took in his appearance and liked it. He had
delicate features, redeemed from effeminacy by the swarthiness of his
complexion, and his quick intensity of expression. His eyes were
generally merry-looking, but at times they and his mouth so suddenly
changed, and gave her such an idea of latent passion, that it almost
made her afraid. But this look was only for an instant; and had in it no
doggedness, no vindictiveness; it was rather the instantaneous ferocity
of expression that comes over the countenances of all natives of wild or
southern countries—a ferocity which enhances the charm of the childlike
softness into which such a look may melt away. Margaret might fear the
violence of the impulsive nature thus occasionally betrayed, but there
was nothing in it to make her distrust, or recoil in the least, from the
new-found brother. On the contrary, all their intercourse was peculiarly
charming to her from the very first. She knew then how much
responsibility she had had to bear, from the exquisite sensation of
relief which she felt in Frederick’s presence. He understood his father
and mother—their characters and their weaknesses, and went along with a
careless freedom, which was yet most delicately careful not to hurt or
wound any of their feelings. He seemed to know instinctively when a
little of the natural brilliancy of his manner and conversation would
not jar on the deep depression of his father, or might relieve his
mother’s pain. Whenever it would have been out of tune, and out of time,
his patient devotion and watchfulness came into play, and made him an
admirable nurse. Then Margaret was almost touched into tears by the
allusions which he often made to their childish days in the New Forest;
he had never forgotten her—or Helstone either—all the time he had been
roaming among distant countries and foreign people. She might talk to
him of the old spot, and never feared tiring him. She had been afraid of
him before he came, even while she had longed for his coming; seven or
eight years had, she felt, produced such great changes in herself that,
forgetting how much of the original Margaret was left, she had reasoned
that if her tastes and feelings had so materially altered, even in her
stay-at-home life, his wild career, with which she was but imperfectly
acquainted, must have almost substituted another Frederick for the tall
stripling in his middy’s uniform, whom she remembered looking up to with
such admiring awe. But in their absence they had grown nearer to each
other in age, as well as in many other things. And so it was that the
weight, this sorrowful time, was lightened to Margaret. Other light than
that of Frederick’s presence she had none. For a few hours, the mother
rallied on seeing her son. She sate with his hand in hers; she would not
part with it even while she slept; and Margaret had to feed him like a
baby, rather than he should disturb her mother by removing a finger.
Mrs. Hale wakened while they were thus engaged; she slowly moved her
head round on the pillow, and smiled at her children, as she understood
what they were doing, and why it was done.

“I am very selfish,” said she; “but it will not be for long.” Frederick
bent down and kissed the feeble hand that imprisoned his.

This state of tranquility could not endure for many days, nor perhaps
for many hours; so Dr. Donaldson assured Margaret. After the kind doctor
had gone away, she stole down to Frederick, who, during the visit, had
been adjured to remain quietly concealed in the back parlour, usually
Dixon’s bedroom, but now given up to him.

Margaret told him what Dr. Donaldson said.

“I don’t believe it,” he exclaimed. “She is very ill; she may be
dangerously ill, and in immediate danger, too; but I can’t imagine that
she could be as she is, if she were on the point of death. Margaret! she
should have some other advice—some London doctor. Have you never
thought of that?”

“Yes,” said Margaret, “more than once. But I don’t believe it would do
any good. And, you know, we have not the money to bring any great London
surgeon down, and I am sure Dr. Donaldson is only second in skill to the
very best,—if, indeed, he is to them.”

Frederick began to walk up and down the room impatiently.

“I have credit in Cadiz,” said he, “but none here, owing to this
wretched change of name. Why did my father leave Helstone? That was the
blunder.”

“It was no blunder,” said Margaret gloomily. “And above all possible
chances, avoid letting papa hear anything like what you have just been
saying. I can see that he is tormenting himself already with the idea
that mamma would never have been ill if we had stayed at Helstone, and
you don’t know papa’s agonising power of self-reproach!”

Frederick walked away as if he were on the quarter-deck. At last he
stopped right opposite to Margaret, and looked at her drooping and
desponding attitude for an instant.

“My little Margaret!” said he, caressing her. “Let us hope as long as we
can. Poor little woman! what! is this face all wet with tears? I will
hope. I will, in spite of a thousand doctors. Bear up, Margaret, and be
brave enough to hope!”

Margaret choked in trying to speak, and when she did it was very low.

“I must try to be meek enough to trust. Oh, Frederick! mamma was getting
to love me so! And I was getting to understand her. And now comes death
to snap us asunder!”

“Come, come, come! Let us go upstairs, and do something, rather than
waste time that may be so precious. Thinking has, many a time, made me
sad, darling; but doing never did in all my life. My theory is a sort of
parody on the maxim of ‘Get money, my son, honestly if you can; but get
money.’ My precept is, ‘Do something my sister, do good if you can; but,
at any rate, do something.’”

“Not excluding mischief,” said Margaret, smiling faintly through her
tears.

“By no means. What I do exclude is the remorse afterwards. Blot your
misdeeds out (if you are particularly conscientious), by a good deed, as
soon as you can; just as we did a correct sum at school on the slate,
where an incorrect one was only half rubbed out. It was better than
wetting our sponge with our tears; both less loss of time where tears
had to be waited for, and a better effect at last.”

If Margaret thought Frederick’s theory rather a rough one at first, she
saw how he worked it out into continual production of kindness in fact.
After a bad night with his mother (for he insisted on taking his turn as
a sitter-up) he was busy next morning before breakfast, contriving a
leg-rest for Dixon, who was beginning to feel the fatigues of watching.
At breakfast-time, he interested Mr. Hale with vivid, graphic, rattling
accounts of the wild life he had led in Mexico, South America, and
elsewhere. Margaret would have given up the effort in despair to rouse
Mr. Hale out of his dejection; it would even have affected herself and
rendered her incapable of talking at all. But Fred, true to his theory,
did something perpetually; and talking was the only thing to be done,
besides eating, at breakfast.

Before the night of that day, Dr. Donaldson’s opinion was proved to be
too well founded. Convulsions came on; and when they ceased, Mrs. Hale
was unconscious. Her husband might lie by her shaking the bed with his
sobs; her son’s strong arms might lift her tenderly up into a
comfortable position; her daughter’s hands might bathe her face; but she
knew them not. She would never recognise them again, till they met in
Heaven.

Before the morning came all was over.

Then Margaret rose from her trembling and despondency, and became as a
strong angel of comfort to her father and brother. For Frederick had
broken down now, and all his theories were of no use to him. He cried so
violently when shut up in his little room at night, that Margaret and
Dixon came down in affright to warn him to be quiet: for the house
partitions were but thin, and the next door neighbours might easily hear
his youthful passionate sobs, so different from the slower trembling
agony of after-life, when we become inured to grief, and dare not be
rebellious against the inexorable doom, knowing who it is that decrees.

Margaret sate with her father in the room of the dead. If he had cried,
she would have been thankful. But he sate by the bed quite quietly;
only, from time to time, he uncovered the face, and stroked it gently,
making a kind of soft inarticulate noise, like that of some
mother-animal caressing her young. He took no notice of Margaret’s
presence. Once or twice she came up to kiss him; and he submitted to it,
giving her a little push away when she had done, as if her affection
disturbed him from his absorption in the dead. He started when he heard
Frederick’s cries, and shook his head:—“Poor boy! poor boy!” he said,
and then took no more notice. Margaret’s heart ached within her. She
could not think of her own loss in thinking of her father’s case. The
night was wearing away, and the day was at hand, when, without a word of
preparation, Margaret’s voice broke upon the stillness of the room, with
a clearness of sound that startled even herself: “Let not your heart be
troubled,” it said; and she went steadily on through all that chapter of
unspeakable consolation.




CHAPTER XXXI.

“SHOULD AULD ACQUAINTANCE BE FORGOT.”

    “Show not that manner, and these features all,
     The serpent’s cunning, and the sinner’s fall?”
                          CRABBE.


The chill, shivery October morning came; not the October morning of the
country, with soft, silvery mists, clearing off before the sunbeams that
bring out all the gorgeous beauty of colouring, but the October morning
of Milton, whose silvery mists were heavy fogs, and where the sun could
only show long dusky streets when he did break through and shine.
Margaret went languidly about, assisting Dixon in her task of arranging
the house. Her eyes were continually blinded by tears, but she had no
time to give way to regular crying. The father and brother depended
upon her; while they were giving way to grief, she must be working,
planning, considering. Even the necessary arrangements for the funeral
seemed to devolve upon her.

When the fire was bright and crackling—when everything was ready for
breakfast, and the tea-kettle was singing away, Margaret gave a last
look round the room before going to summon Mr. Hale and Frederick. She
wanted everything to look as cheerful as possible; and yet, when it did
so, the contrast between it and her own thoughts forced her into sudden
weeping. She was kneeling by the sofa, hiding her face in the cushions
that no one might hear her cry, when she was touched on the shoulder by
Dixon.

“Come, Miss Hale—come, my dear! You must not give way, or where shall
we all be? There is not another person in the house fit to give a
direction of any kind, and there is so much to be done. There’s who’s to
manage the funeral; and who’s to come to it; and where it’s to be; and
all to be settled: and Master Frederick’s like one crazed with crying,
and master never was a good one for settling; and, poor gentleman, he
goes about now as if he was lost. It’s bad enough, my dear, I know; but
death comes to us all; and you’re well off never to have lost any friend
till now.”

Perhaps so. But this seemed a loss by itself; not to bear comparison
with any other event in the world. Margaret did not take any comfort
from what Dixon said, but the unusual tenderness of the prim old
servant’s manner touched her to the heart; and, more from a desire to
show her gratitude for this than for any other reason, she roused
herself up, and smiled in answer to Dixon’s anxious look at her; and
went to tell her father and brother that breakfast was ready.

Mr. Hale came—as if in a dream, or rather with the unconscious motion
of a sleep-walker, whose eyes and mind perceive other things than what
are present. Frederick came briskly in, with a forced cheerfulness,
grasped her hand, looked into her eyes and burst into tears. She had to
try and think of little nothings to say all breakfast-time, in order to
prevent the recurrence of her companions’ thoughts too strongly to the
last meal they had taken together, when there had been a continual
strained listening for some sound or signal from the sick-room.

After breakfast, she resolved to speak to her father about the funeral.
He shook his head, and assented to all she proposed, though many of her
propositions absolutely contradicted one another. Margaret gained no
real decision from him; and was leaving the room languidly, to have a
consultation with Dixon, when Mr. Hale motioned her back to his side.

“Ask Mr. Bell,” said he in a hollow voice.

“Mr. Bell!” said she, a little surprised. “Mr. Bell of Oxford?”

“Mr. Bell,” he repeated. “Yes. He was my groom’s-man.”

Margaret understood the association.

“I will write to-day,” said she. He sank again into listlessness. All
morning she toiled on, longing for rest, but in a continual whirl of
melancholy business.

Towards evening Dixon said to her:

“I’ve done it, miss. I was really afraid for master, that he’d have a
stroke with grief. He’s been all this day with poor missus; and when
I’ve listened at the door, I’ve heard him talking to her, and talking to
her, as if she was alive. When I went in he would be quite quiet, but
all in a maze like. So I thought to myself, he ought to be roused; and
if it gives him a shock at first, it will, maybe, be the better for him
afterwards. So I’ve been and told him, that I don’t think it’s safe for
Master Frederick to be here. And I don’t. It was only on Tuesday, when I
was out, that I met a Southampton man—the first I’ve seen since I came
to Milton; they don’t make their way much up here, I think. Well, it was
young Leonards, old Leonards the draper’s son, as great a scamp as ever
lived—who plagued his father almost to death, and then ran off to sea.
I never could abide him. He was in the Orion at the same time as
Frederick, I know; though I don’t recollect if he was there at the
mutiny.”

“Did he know you?” said Margaret, eagerly.

“Why, that’s the worst of it. I don’t believe he would have known me but
for my being such a fool as to call out his name. He were a Southampton
man, in a strange place, or else I should never have been so ready to
call cousins with him, a nasty, good-for-nothing-fellow. Says he, ‘Miss
Dixon! who would ha’ thought of seeing you here? But perhaps I mistake,
and you’re Miss Dixon no longer?’ So I told him he might still address
me as an unmarried lady, though if I hadn’t been so particular, I’d had
good chances of matrimony. He was polite enough: ‘He couldn’t look at me
and doubt me.’ But I were not to be caught with such chaff from such a
fellow as him, and so I told him; and, by way of being even, I asked him
after his father (who I knew had turned him out of doors), as if they
were the best friends as ever was. So then, to spite me—for you see we
were getting savage, for all we were so civil to each other—he began to
inquire after Master Frederick, and said, what a scrape he’d got into
(as if Master Frederick’s scrapes would ever wash George Leonards white,
or make ’em look otherwise than nasty, dirty black), and how he’d be
hung for mutiny if ever he were caught, and how a hundred pound reward
had been offered for catching him, and what a disgrace he had been to
his family—all to spite me, you see, my dear, because before now I’ve
helped old Mr. Leonards to give George a good rating, down in
Southampton. So I said, there were other families as I knew, who had far
more cause to blush for their sons, and to be thankful if they could
think they were earning an honest living far away from home. To which he
made answer, like the impudent chap he is, that he were in a
confidential situation, and if I knew of any young man who had been so
unfortunate as to lead vicious courses, and wanted to turn steady, he’d
have no objection to lend him his patronage. He, indeed! Why, he’d
corrupt a saint. I’ve not felt so bad myself for years as when I were
standing talking to him the other day. I could have cried to think I
couldn’t spite him better, for he kept smiling in my face, as if he took
all my compliments for earnest; and I couldn’t see that he minded what I
said in the least, while I was mad with all his speeches.”

“But you did not tell him anything about us—about Frederick?”

“Not I,” said Dixon. “He had never the grace to ask where I was staying;
and I shouldn’t have told him if he had asked. Nor did I ask him what
his precious situation was. He was waiting for a bus, and just then it
drove up, and he hailed it. But, to plague me to the last, he turned
back before he got in, and said, ‘If you can help me to trap Lieutenant
Hale, Miss Dixon, we’ll go partners in the reward. I know you’d like to
be my partner, now wouldn’t you? Don’t be shy, but say yes.’ And he
jumped on the bus, and I saw his ugly face leering at me with a wicked
smile to think how he’d had the last word of plaguing.”

Margaret was made very uncomfortable by this account of Dixon’s.

“Have you told Frederick?” asked she.

“No,” said Dixon. “I were uneasy in my mind at knowing that bad Leonards
was in town; but there was so much else to think about that I did not
dwell on it all. But when I saw master sitting so stiff, and with his
eyes so glazed and sad, I thought it might rouse him to have to think of
Master Frederick in hiding, he would have to go, poor fellow, before Mr.
Bell came.”

“Oh, I’m not afraid of Mr. Bell; but I am afraid of this Leonards. I
must tell Frederick. What did Leonards look like?”

“A bad-looking fellow, I can assure you, miss. Whiskers such as I should
be ashamed to wear—they are so red. And for all he said he’d got a
confidential situation, he was dressed in fustian just like a
working-man.”

It was evident that Frederick must go. Go, too, when he had so
completely vaulted into his place in the family, and promised to be such
a stay and staff to his father and sister. Go, when his cares for the
living mother, and sorrow for the dead, seemed to make him one of those
peculiar people who are bound to us by a fellow-love for them that are
taken away. Just as Margaret was thinking all this, sitting over the
drawing-room fire—her father restless and uneasy under the pressure of
this newly-aroused fear, of which he had not as yet spoken—Frederick
came in, his brightness dimmed, but the extreme violence of his grief
passed away. He came up to Margaret, and kissed her forehead.

“How wan you look, Margaret!” said he in a low voice. “You have been
thinking of everybody, and no one has thought of you. Lie on this
sofa—there is nothing for you to do.”

“That is the worst,” said Margaret, in a sad whisper. But she went and
lay down, and her brother covered her feet with a shawl and then sate on
the ground by her side; and the two began to talk together in a subdued
tone.

Margaret told him all that Dixon had related of her interview with
young Leonards. Frederick’s lips closed with a long whew of dismay.

“I should just like to have it out with that young fellow. A worse
sailor was never on board ship—nor a much worse man either. I declare,
Margaret—you know the circumstances of the whole affair?”

“Yes, mamma told me.”

“Well, when all the sailors who were good for anything were indignant
with our captain, this fellow to curry favour—pah! And to think of his
being here! Oh, if he’d a notion I was within twenty miles of him, he’d
ferret me out to pay all old grudges. I’d rather anybody had the hundred
pounds they think I am worth than that rascal. What a pity poor old
Dixon could not be persuaded to give me up, and make a provision for her
old age!”

“Oh, Frederick, hush! Don’t talk so.”

Mr. Hale came towards them, eager and trembling. He had overheard what
they were saying. He took Frederick’s hand in both of his:

“My boy, you must go. It is very bad—but I see you must. You have done
all you could—you have been a comfort to her.”

“Oh, papa, must he go?” said Margaret, pleading against her own
conviction of necessity.

“I declare, I’ve a good mind to face it out, and stand my trial. If I
could only pick up my evidence! I cannot endure the thought of being in
the power of such a blackguard as Leonards. I could almost have
enjoyed—in other circumstances—this stolen visit: it has had all the
charm which the Frenchwoman attributed to forbidden pleasures.”

“One of the earliest things I can remember,” said Margaret, “was your
being in some great disgrace, Fred, for stealing apples. We had plenty
of our own—trees loaded with them; but some one had told you that
stolen fruit tasted sweetest, which you took _au pied de la lettre_, and
off you went a-robbing. You have not changed your feelings much since
then.”

“Yes—you must go,” repeated Mr. Hale, answering Margaret’s question,
which she had asked some time ago. His thoughts were fixed on one
subject, and it was an effort to him to follow the zigzag remarks of his
children—an effort which he did not make.

Margaret and Frederick looked at each other. That quick momentary
sympathy would be theirs no longer if he went away. So much was
understood through eyes that could not be put into words. Both coursed
the same thought till it was lost in sadness. Frederick shook it off
first:

“Do you know, Margaret, I was very nearly giving both Dixon and myself a
good fright this afternoon. I was in my bedroom; I had heard a ring at
the front door, but I thought the ringer must have done his business and
gone away long ago; so I was on the point of making my appearance in the
passage, when, as I opened my room door, I saw Dixon coming downstairs;
and she frowned and kicked me into hiding again. I kept the door open,
and heard a message given to some man that was in my father’s study, and
that then went away. What could it have been? Some of the shopmen?”

“Very likely,” said Margaret indifferently. “There was a little quiet
man who came up for orders about two o’clock.”

“But this was not a little man—a great powerful fellow; and it was past
four when he was here.”

“It was Mr. Thornton,” said Mr. Hale. They were glad to have drawn him
into the conversation.

“Mr. Thornton!” said Margaret, a little surprised. “I thought——”

“Well, little one, what did you think?” asked Frederick, as she did not
finish her sentence.

“Oh, only,” said she, reddening and looking straight at him, “I fancied
you meant some one of a different class, not a gentleman; somebody come
on an errand.”

“He looked like someone of that kind,” said Frederick, carelessly. “I
took him for a shopman, and he turns out a manufacturer.”

Margaret was silent. She remembered how at first, before she knew his
character, she had spoken and thought of him just as Frederick was
doing. It was but a natural impression that was made upon him, and yet
she was a little annoyed by it. She was unwilling to speak; she wanted
to make Frederick understand what kind of person Mr. Thornton was—but
she was tongue-tied.

Mr. Hale went on. “He came to offer any assistance in his power, I
believe. But I could not see him. I told Dixon to ask him if he would
like to see you—I think I asked her to find you, and you would go to
him. I don’t know what I said.”

“He has been a very agreeable acquaintance, has he not?” asked
Frederick, throwing the question like a ball for any one to catch who
chose.

“A very kind friend,” said Margaret, when her father did not answer.

Frederick was silent for a time. At last he spoke:

“Margaret, it is painful to think I can never thank those who have shown
you kindness. Your acquaintances and mine must be separate. Unless,
indeed, I run the chances of a court-martial, or unless you and my
father would come to Spain.” He threw out this last suggestion as a kind
of feeler; and then suddenly made the plunge. “You don’t know how I wish
you would. I have a good position—the chance of a better,” continued
he, reddening like a girl. “That Dolores Barbour that I was telling you
of, Margaret—I only wish you knew her; I am sure you would like—no,
love is the right word, like is so poor—you would love her, father, if
you knew her. She is not eighteen; but if she is in the same mind
another year, she is to be my wife. Mr. Barbour won’t let us call it an
engagement. But if you would come you would find friends everywhere,
besides Dolores. Think of it, father. Margaret be on my side.”

“No—no more removals for me,” said Mr. Hale. “One has cost me my wife.
No more removals in this life. She will be here; and here will I stay
out my appointed time.”

“Oh, Frederick,” said Margaret, “tell us more about her. I never thought
of this; but I am so glad. You will have some one to love and care for
you out there. Tell us all about it.”

“In the first place, she is a Roman Catholic. That’s the only objection
I anticipated. But my father’s change of opinion—nay, Margaret, don’t
sigh.”

Margaret had reason to sigh a little more before the conversation ended.
Frederick himself was Roman Catholic in fact, though not in profession
as yet. This was, then, the reason why his sympathy in her extreme
distress at her father’s leaving the church had been so faintly
expressed in his letters. She had thought it was the carelessness of a
sailor; but the truth was, that even then he was himself inclined to
give up the form of religion into which had been baptized, only that his
opinions were tending in exactly the opposite direction to those of his
father. How much love had to do with this change not even Frederick
himself could have told. Margaret gave up talking about this branch of
the subject at last; and, returning to the fact of the engagement, she
began to consider it in some fresh light.

“But for her sake, Fred, you surely will try and clear yourself of the
exaggerated charges brought against you, even if the charge of mutiny
itself be true. If there were to be a court-martial, and you could find
your witnesses, you might, at any rate, show your disobedience to
authority was because that authority was unworthily exercised.”

Mr. Hale roused himself up to listen to his son’s answer.

“In the first place, Margaret, who is to hunt up my witnesses? All of
them are sailors, drafted off to other ships, except those whose
evidence would go for very little, as they took part or sympathised in
the affair. In the next place allow me to tell you, you don’t know what
a court-martial is, and consider it as an assembly where justice is
administered, instead of what it really is—a court where authority
weighs nine-tenths in the balance, and evidence forms only the other
tenth. In such cases, evidence itself can hardly escape being influenced
by the prestige of authority.”

“But is it not worth trying, to see how much evidence might be
discovered and arrayed on your behalf? At present, all those who knew
you formerly, believe you guilty without any shadow of excuse. You have
never tried to justify yourself, and we have never known where to seek
for proofs of your justification. Now, for Miss Barbour’s sake, make
your conduct as clear as you can in the eye of the world. She may not
care for it; she has, I am sure, that trust in you that we all have; but
you ought not to let her ally herself to one under such a serious
charge, without showing the world exactly how it is you stand. You
disobeyed authority—that was bad; but to have stood by, without word or
act, while the authority was brutally used, would have been infinitely
worse. People know what you did; but not the motives that elevate it out
of a crime into an heroic protection of the weak. For Dolores’ sake,
they ought to know.”

“But how must I make them know? I am not sufficiently sure of the purity
and justice of those who would be my judges, to give myself up to a
court-martial, even if I could bring a whole array of truth-speaking
witnesses. I can’t send a bell-man about, to cry aloud and proclaim in
the streets what you are pleased to call my heroism. No one would read a
pamphlet of self-justification so long after the deed, even if I put one
out.”

“Will you consult a lawyer as to your chances of exculpation?” asked
Margaret, looking up, and turning very red.

“I must first catch my lawyer, and have a look at him, and see how I
like him, before I make him into my confidant. Many a briefless
barrister might twist his conscience into thinking, that he could earn a
hundred pounds very easily by doing a good action—in giving me, a
criminal, up to justice.”

“Nonsense, Frederick!—because I know a lawyer on whose honour I can
rely; of whose cleverness in his profession people speak very highly;
and who would, I think, take a good deal of trouble for any of—Aunt
Shaw’s relations. Mr. Henry Lennox, papa.”

“I think it is a good idea,” said Mr. Hale. “But don’t propose anything
which will detain Frederick in England. Don’t, for your mother’s sake.”

“You could go to London by a night-train,” continued Margaret, warming
up into her plan. “He must go to-morrow, I’m afraid, papa,” said she,
tenderly; “we fixed that, because of Mr. Bell, and Dixon’s disagreeable
acquaintance.”

“Yes; I must go to-morrow,” said Frederick, decidedly.

Mr. Hale groaned. “I can’t bear to part with you, and yet I am miserable
with anxiety as long as you stop here.”

“Well then,” said Margaret, “listen to my plan. He gets to London on
Friday morning. I will—you might—no! it would be better to give him a
note to Mr. Lennox. You will find him at his chambers in the Temple.”

“I will write down a list of all the names I can remember on board the
Orion. I could leave it with him to ferret them out. He is Edith’s
husband’s brother, isn’t he? I remember your naming him in your letters.
I have money in Barbour’s hands. I can pay a pretty long bill, if
there’s any chance of success. Money, dear father, that I had meant for
a different purpose; so I shall only consider it as borrowed from you
and Margaret.”

“Don’t do that,” said Margaret. “You won’t risk it if you do. And it
will be as risk; only it is worth trying. You can sail from London as
well as from Liverpool?”

“To be sure, little goose. Wherever I feel water heaving under a plank,
there I feel at home. I’ll pick up some craft or other to take me off,
never fear. I won’t stay twenty-four hours in London, away from you on
the one hand, and from somebody else on the other.”

It was rather a comfort to Margaret that Frederick took it into his head
to look over her shoulder as she wrote to Mr. Lennox. If she had not
been thus compelled to write steadily and concisely on, she might have
hesitated over many a word, and been puzzled to choose between many an
expression, in the awkwardness of being the first to resume the
intercourse of which the concluding event had been so unpleasant to both
sides. However, the note was taken from her before she had even had time
to look it over, and treasured up in a pocket-book, out of which fell a
long lock of black hair, the sight of which caused Frederick’s eyes to
glow with pleasure.

“Now you would like to see that, wouldn’t you?” said he. “No! you must
wait till you see her herself. She is too perfect to be known by
fragments. No mean brick shall be a specimen of the building of my
palace.”




CHAPTER XXXII.

MISCHANCES.

    “What! remain to be
    Denounced—dragged, it may be, in chains.”
              WERNER.


All the next day they sate together—they three. Mr. Hale hardly ever
spoke but when his children asked him questions, and forced him, as it
were, into the present. Frederick’s grief was no more to be seen or
heard; the first paroxysm had passed over, and now he was ashamed of
having been so battered down by emotion; and though his sorrow for the
loss of his mother was a deep real feeling, and would last out his life,
it was never to be spoken of again. Margaret, not so passionate at
first, was more suffering now. At times she cried a good deal; and her
manner, even when speaking on different things, had a mournful
tenderness about it, which was deepened whenever her looks fell upon
Frederick, and she thought of his rapidly approaching departure. She was
glad he was going, on her father’s account, however much she might
grieve over it on her own. The anxious terror in which Mr. Hale lived
lest his son should be detected and captured, far outweighed the
pleasure he derived from his presence. The nervousness had increased
since Mrs. Hale’s death, probably because he dwelt upon it more
exclusively. He started at every unusual sound, and was never
comfortable unless Frederick sate out of the immediate view of any one
entering the room. Towards evening he said:

“You will go with Frederick to the station, Margaret? I shall want to
know he is safely off. You will bring me word that he is clear of
Milton, at any rate?”

“Certainly,” said Margaret. “I shall like it, if you won’t be lonely
without me, papa.”

“No, no! I should always be fancying some one had known him, and that he
had been stopped, unless you could tell me you had seen him off. And go
to the Outwood station. It is quite as near, and not so many people
about. Take a cab there. There is less risk of his being seen. What time
is your train, Fred?”

“Ten minutes past six; very nearly dark. So what will you do, Margaret?”

“Oh, I can manage. I am getting very brave and very hard. It is a
well-lighted road all the way home, if it should be dark. But I was out
last week much later.”

Margaret was thankful when the parting was over—the parting from the
dead mother and the living father. She hurried Frederick into the cab,
in order to shorten a scene which she saw was so bitterly painful to her
father, who would accompany his son as he took his last look at his
mother. Partly in consequence of this, and partly owing to one of the
very common mistakes in the “Railway Guide” as to the times when trains
arrive at the smaller stations, they found, on reaching Outwood, that
they had nearly twenty minutes to spare. The booking-office was not
open, so they could not even take the ticket. They accordingly went down
the flight of steps that led to the level of the ground below the
railway. There was a broad cinder-path diagonally crossing a field which
lay alongside of the carriage-road, and they went there to walk
backwards and forwards for the few minutes they had to spare.

Margaret’s hand lay in Frederick’s arm. He took hold of it
affectionately.

“Margaret! I am going to consult Mr. Lennox as to the chance of
exculpating myself so that I may return to England whenever I choose,
more for your sake than for the sake of anyone else. I can’t bear to
think of your lonely position if any thing should happen to my father.
He looks sadly changed—terribly shaken. I wish you could get him to
think of the Cadiz plan, for many reasons. What could you do if he were
taken away? You have no friend near. We are curiously bare of
relations.”

Margaret could hardly keep from crying at the tender anxiety with which
Frederick was bringing before her an event which she herself felt was
not very improbable, so severely had the cares of the last few months
told upon Mr. Hale. But she tried to rally as she said:

“There have been such strange unexpected changes in my life during these
last two years, that I feel more than ever that it is not worth while to
calculate too closely what I should do if any future event took place. I
try to think only upon the present.” She paused; they were standing
still for a moment, close on the field side of the stile leading into
the road; the setting sun fell on their faces. Frederick held her hand
in his, and looked with wistful anxiety into her face, reading there
more care and trouble than she would betray by words. She went on:

“We shall write often to one another, and I will promise—for I see it
will set your mind at ease—to tell you every worry I have. Papa
is”—she started a little, a hardly visible start—but Frederick felt
the sudden motion of the hand he held, and turned his full face to the
road, along which a horseman was slowly riding, just passing the very
stile where they stood. Margaret bowed; her bow was stiffly returned.

“Who is that?” said Frederick, almost before he was out of hearing.

Margaret was a little drooping, a little flushed, as she replied: “Mr.
Thornton; you saw him before, you know.”

“Only his back. He is an unprepossessing-looking fellow. What a scowl he
has!”

“Something has happened to vex him,” said Margaret apologetically. “You
would not have thought him unprepossessing if you had seen him with
mamma.”

“I fancy it must be time to go and take my ticket. If I had known how
dark it would be, we wouldn’t have sent back the cab, Margaret.”

“Oh, don’t fidget about that. I can take a cab here, if I like; or go
back by the rail-road, when I should have shops and people and lamps all
the way from the Milton station-house. Don’t think of me; take care of
yourself. I am sick with the thought that Leonards may be in the same
train with you. Look well into the carriage before you get in.”

They went back to the station. Margaret insisted on going into the full
light of the flaring gas inside to take the ticket. Some idle-looking
young men were lounging about with the station-master. Margaret thought
she had seen the face of one of them before, and returned him a proud
look of offended dignity for his somewhat impertinent stare of
undisguised admiration. She went hastily to her brother, who was
standing outside, and took hold of his arm. “Have you got your bag? Let
us walk about here on the platform,” said she, a little flurried at the
idea of so soon being left alone, and her bravery oozing out rather
faster than she liked to acknowledge even to herself. She heard a step
following them along the flags; it stopped when they stopped, looking
out along the line and hearing the whizz of the coming train. They did
not speak; their hearts were too full. Another moment, and the train
would be here; a minute more, and he would be gone. Margaret almost
repented the urgency with which she had entreated him to go to London;
it was throwing more chances of detection in his way. If he had sailed
for Spain by Liverpool, he might have been off in two or three hours.

Frederick turned round, right facing the lamp, where the gas darted up
in vivid anticipation of the train. A man in the dress of a railway
porter started forward; a bad-looking man, who seemed to have drunk
himself into a state of brutality, although his senses were in perfect
order.

“By your leave, miss!” said he, pushing Margaret rudely on one side, and
seizing Frederick by the collar.

“Your name is Hale, I believe?”

In an instant, how, Margaret did not see, for everything danced before
her eyes—but by some sleight of wrestling, Frederick had tripped him
up, and he fell from the height of three or four feet, which the
platform was elevated above the space of soft ground, by the side of the
railroad. There he lay.

“Run, run!” gasped Margaret. “The train is here. It was Leonards, was
it? oh, run! I will carry your bag.” And she took him by the arm to push
him along with all her feeble force. A door was opened in a carriage—he
jumped in; and as he leant out to say, “God bless you, Margaret!” the
train rushed past her; and she was left standing alone. She was so
terribly sick and faint that she was thankful to be able to turn into
the ladies’ waiting-room, and sit down for an instant. At first she
could do nothing but gasp for breath. It was such a hurry; such a
sickening alarm; such a near chance. If the train had not been there at
the moment, the man would have jumped up again and called for assistance
to arrest him. She wondered if the man had got up: she tried to remember
if she had seen him move: she wondered if he could have been seriously
hurt. She ventured out; the platform was all alight, but still quite
deserted; she went to the end, and looked over, somewhat fearfully. No
one was there; and then she was glad she had made herself go, and
inspect, for otherwise terrible thoughts would have haunted her dreams.
And even as it was, she was so trembling and affrighted that she felt
she could not walk home along the road, which did indeed seem lonely and
dark, as she gazed down upon it from the blaze of the station. She would
wait till the down train passed and take her seat in it. But what if
Leonards recognized her as Frederick’s companion! She peered about,
before venturing into the booking-office to take her ticket. There were
only some railway officials standing about; and talking loud to one
another.

“So Leonards has been drinking again!” said one, seemingly in authority.
“He’ll need all his boasted influence to keep his place this time.”

“Where is he?” asked another, while Margaret, her back towards them, was
counting her change with trembling fingers, not daring to turn round
until she heard the answer to this question.

“I don’t know. He came in not five minutes ago, with some long story or
other about a fall he’d had, swearing awfully: and wanted to borrow some
money from me to go to London by the next up-train. He made all sorts of
tipsy promises, but I’d something else to do than listen to him; I told
him to go about his business; and he went off at the front door.”

“He’s at the nearest vaults, I’ll be bound,” said the first speaker.
“Your money would have gone there too, if you’d been such a fool as to
lend it.”

“Catch me! I knew better what his London meant. Why, he has never paid
me off that five shillings”—and so they went on.

And now all Margaret’s anxiety was for the train to come. She hid
herself once more in the ladies’ waiting-room, and fancied every noise
was Leonards’ step—every loud and boisterous voice was his. But no one
came near her until the train drew up; when she was civilly helped into
a carriage by a porter, into whose face she durst not look till they
were in motion, and then she saw that it was not Leonards’.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

PEACE.

    “Sleep on, my love, in thy cold bed,
     Never to be disquieted!
     My last Good Night—thou wilt not wake
     Till I thy fate shall overtake.”
                    DR. KING.


Home seemed unnaturally quiet after all this terror and noisy commotion.
Her father had seen all due preparation made for her refreshment on her
return; and then sate down again in his accustomed chair, to fall into
one of his sad waking dreams. Dixon had got Mary Higgins to scold and
direct in the kitchen; and her scolding was not the less energetic
because it was delivered in an angry whisper; for, speaking above her
breath she would have thought irreverent, as long as there was any one
lying dead in the house. Margaret had resolved not to mention the
crowning and closing affright to her father. There was no use in
speaking about it; it had ended well; the only thing to be feared was
lest Leonards should in some way borrow money enough to effect his
purpose of following Frederick to London, and hunting him out there. But
there were immense chances against the success of any such plan; and
Margaret determined not to torment herself by thinking of what she could
do nothing to prevent. Frederick would be as much on his guard as she
could put him; and in a day or two at most he would be safely out of
England.

“I suppose we shall hear from Mr. Bell to-morrow,” said Margaret.

“Yes,” replied her father. “I suppose so.”

“If he can come, he will be here to-morrow evening, I should think.”

“If he cannot come, I shall ask Mr. Thornton to go with me to the
funeral. I cannot go alone. I should break down utterly.”

“Don’t ask Mr. Thornton, papa. Let me go with you,” said Margaret,
impetuously.

“You! My dear, women do not generally go.”

“No; because they can’t control themselves. Women of our class don’t go,
because they have no power over their emotions, and yet are ashamed of
showing them. Poor women go, and don’t care if they are seen overwhelmed
with grief. But I promise you, papa, that if you will let me go, I will
be no trouble. Don’t have a stranger, and leave me out. Dear papa! if
Mr. Bell cannot come, I shall go. I won’t urge my wish against your
will, if he does.”

Mr. Bell could not come. He had the gout. It was a most affectionate
letter, and expressed great and true regret for his inability to attend.
He hoped to come and pay them a visit soon, if they would have him; his
Milton property required some looking after, and his agent had written
to him to say that his presence was absolutely necessary; or else he had
avoided coming near Milton as long as he could, and now the only thing
that would reconcile him to this necessary visit was the idea that he
should see, and might possibly be able to comfort his old friend.

Margaret had all the difficulty in the world to persuade her father not
to invite Mr. Thornton. She had an indescribable repugnance to this step
being taken. The night before the funeral, came a stately note from Mrs.
Thornton to Miss Hale, saying that, at her son’s desire, their carriage
should attend the funeral, if it would not be disagreeable to the
family. Margaret tossed the note to her father.

“Oh, don’t let us have these forms,” said she. “Let us go alone—you and
me, papa. They don’t care for us, or else he would have offered to go
himself, and not have proposed this sending an empty carriage.”

“I thought you were so extremely averse to his going, Margaret,” said
Mr. Hale in some surprise.

“And so I am. I don’t want him to come at all; and I should especially
dislike the idea of our asking him. But this seems such a mockery of
mourning that I did not expect it from him.” She startled her father by
bursting into tears. She had been so subdued in her grief, so thoughtful
for others, so gentle and patient in all things, that he could not
understand her impatient ways to-night; she seemed agitated and
restless; and at all the tenderness which her father in his turn now
lavished upon her, she only cried the more.

She passed so bad a night that she was ill prepared for the additional
anxiety caused by a letter received from Frederick. Mr. Lennox was out
of town; his clerk said that he would return by the following Tuesday at
the latest; that he might possibly be home on Monday. Consequently,
after some consideration, Frederick had determined upon remaining in
London a day or two longer. He had thought of coming down to Milton
again; the temptation had been very strong; but the idea of Mr. Bell
domesticated in his father’s house, and the alarm he had received at the
last moment at the railway station, had made him resolve to stay in
London. Margaret might be assured he would take every precaution against
being tracked by Leonards. Margaret was thankful that she received this
letter while her father was absent in her mother’s room. If he had been
present, he would have expected her to read it aloud to him, and it
would have raised in him a state of nervous alarm which she would have
found it impossible to soothe away. There was not merely the fact, which
disturbed her excessively, of Frederick’s detention in London, but there
were allusions to the recognition at the last moment at Milton, and the
possibility of a pursuit, which made her blood run cold; and how then
would it have affected her father? Many a time did Margaret repent of
having suggested and urged on the plan of consulting Mr. Lennox. At the
moment, it had seemed as if it would occasion so little delay—add so
little to the apparently small chances of detection; and yet everything
that had since occurred had tended to make it so undesirable. Margaret
battled hard against this regret of hers for what could not now be
helped; this self-reproach for having said what at the time appeared to
be wise, but which after events were proving to have been so foolish.
But her father was in too depressed a state of mind and body to struggle
healthily; he would succumb to all these causes for morbid regret over
what could not be recalled. Margaret summoned up all her forces to her
aid. Her father seemed to have forgotten that they had any reason to
expect a letter from Frederick that morning. He was absorbed in one
idea—that the last visible token of the presence of his wife was to be
carried away from him, and hidden from his sight. He trembled pitifully
as the undertaker’s man was arranging his crape draperies around him. He
looked wistfully at Margaret; and, when released, he tottered towards
her, murmuring, “Pray for me, Margaret. I have no strength left in me. I
cannot pray. I give her up because I must. I try to bear it: indeed I
do. I know it is God’s will. But I cannot see why she died. Pray for me,
Margaret, that I may have faith to pray. It is a great strait, my
child.”

Margaret sat by him in the coach, almost supporting him in her arms; and
repeating all the noble verses of holy comfort, or texts expressive of
faithful resignation, that she could remember. Her voice never faltered;
and she herself gained strength by doing this. Her father’s lips moved
after her, repeating the well-known texts as her words suggested them;
it was terrible to see the patient struggling effort to obtain the
resignation which he had not strength to take into his heart as part of
himself.

Margaret’s fortitude nearly gave way as Dixon, with a slight motion of
her hand, directed her notice to Nicholas Higgins and his daughter,
standing a little aloof, but deeply attentive to the ceremonial.
Nicholas wore his usual fustian clothes, but had a bit of black stuff
sown round his hat—a mark of mourning which he had never shown to his
daughter Bessy’s memory. But Mr. Hale saw nothing. He went on repeating
to himself, mechanically as it were, all the funeral service as it was
read by the officiating clergyman; he sighed twice or thrice when all
was ended; and then, putting his hand on Margaret’s arm, he mutely
entreated to be led away, as if he were blind, and she his faithful
guide.

Dixon sobbed aloud; she covered her face with her handkerchief, and was
so absorbed in her own grief that she did not perceive that the crowd,
attracted on such occasions, was dispersing, till she was spoken to by
some one close at hand. It was Mr. Thornton. He had been present all the
time, standing, with bent head, behind a group of people, so that, in
fact, no one had recognised him.

“I beg your pardon,—but, can you tell me how Mr. Hale is? And Miss
Hale, too? I should like to know how they both are.”

“Of course, sir. They are much as is to be expected. Master is terribly
broke down. Miss Hale bears up better than likely.”

Mr. Thornton would rather have heard that she was suffering the natural
sorrow. In the first place, there was selfishness enough in him to have
taken pleasure in the idea that his great love might come in to comfort
and console her; much the same kind of passionate pleasure which comes
stinging through a mother’s heart, when her drooping infant nestles
close to her, and is dependent upon her for everything. But this
delicious vision of what might have been—in which, in spite of all
Margaret’s repulse, he would have indulged only a few days ago—was
miserably disturbed by the recollection of what he had seen near the
Outwood station. “Miserably disturbed!” that is not strong enough. He
was haunted by the remembrance of the handsome young man, with whom she
stood in an attitude of such familiar confidence; and the remembrance
shot through him like an agony, till it made him clench his hands tight
in order to subdue the pain. At that late hour, so far from home! It
took a great moral effort to galvanise his trust—erewhile so
perfect—in Margaret’s pure and exquisite maidenliness into life; as
soon as the effort ceased, his trust dropped down dead and powerless:
and all sorts of wild fancies chased each other like dreams, through his
mind. Here was a little bit of miserable, gnawing confirmation. “She
bore up better than likely” under this grief. She had then some hope to
look to, so bright that even in her affectionate nature it could come in
to lighten the dark hours of a daughter newly made motherless. Yes! he
knew how she would love. He had not loved her without gaining that
instinctive knowledge of what capabilities were in her. Her soul would
walk in glorious sunlight if any man was worthy, by his power of loving,
to win back her love. Even in her mourning she would rest with a
peaceful faith upon his sympathy. His sympathy! Whose? That other man’s.
And that it was another was enough to make Mr. Thornton’s pale grave
face grow doubly wan and stern at Dixon’s answer.

“I suppose I may call,” said he coldly. “On Mr. Hale, I mean. He will
perhaps admit me after to-morrow or so.”

He spoke as if the answer were a matter of indifference to him. But it
was not so. For all his pain, he longed to see the author of it.
Although he hated Margaret at times, when he thought of that gentle,
familiar attitude and all the attendant circumstances, he had a restless
desire to renew her picture in his mind—a longing for the very
atmosphere she breathed. He was in the Charybdis of passion, and must
perforce circle and circle ever nearer round the fatal centre.

“I dare say, sir, master will see you. He was very sorry to have to deny
you the other day; but circumstances was not agreeable just then.”

For some reason or other, Dixon never named this interview that she had
had with Mr. Thornton to Margaret. It might have been mere chance, but
so it was that Margaret never heard that he had attended her poor
mother’s funeral.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

FALSE AND TRUE.

    “Truth will fail thee never, never!
    Though thy bark be tempest-driven,
    Though each plank be rent and riven,
    Truth will bear thee on for ever!”
              ANON.


The “bearing up better than likely” was a terrible strain upon Margaret.
Sometimes she thought she must give way, and cry out with pain, as the
sudden sharp thought came across her, even during her apparently
cheerful conversations with her father, that she had no longer a mother.
About Frederick, too, there was great uneasiness. The Sunday post
intervened, and interfered with their London letters; and on Tuesday
Margaret was surprised and disheartened to find that there was still no
letter. She was quite in the dark as to his plans, and her father was
miserable at all this uncertainty. It broke in upon his lately acquired
habit of sitting still in one easy chair for half a day together. He
kept pacing up and down the room; then out of it; and she heard him upon
the landing opening and shutting the bed-room doors, without any
apparent object. She tried to tranquillise him by reading aloud; but it
was evident he could not listen for long together. How thankful she was
then, that she had kept to herself the additional cause for anxiety
produced by their encounter with Leonards. She was thankful to hear Mr.
Thornton announced. His visit would force her father’s thoughts into
another channel.

He came up straight to her father, whose hands he took and wrung without
a word—holding them in his for a minute or two, during which time his
face, his eyes, his look, told of more sympathy than could be put into
words. Then he turned to Margaret. Not “better than likely” did she
look. Her stately beauty was dimmed with much watching and with many
tears. The expression on her countenance was of gentle patient
sadness—nay of positive present suffering. He had not meant to greet
her otherwise than with his late studied coldness of demeanour; but he
could not help going up to her, as she stood a little aside, rendered
timid by the uncertainty of his manner of late, and saying the few
necessary common-place words in so tender a voice, that her eyes filled
with tears, and she turned away to hide her emotion. She took her work
and sate down very quiet and silent. Mr. Thornton’s heart beat quick and
strong, and for the time he utterly forgot the Outwood lane. He tried to
talk to Mr. Hale: and—his presence always a certain kind of pleasure to
Mr. Hale, as his power and decision made him, and his opinions, a safe,
sure port—was unusually agreeable to her father, as Margaret saw.

Presently Dixon came to the door and said, “Miss Hale, you are wanted.”

Dixon’s manner was so flurried that Margaret turned sick at heart.
Something had happened to Fred. She had no doubt of that. It was well
that her father and Mr. Thornton were so much occupied by their
conversation.

“What is it, Dixon?” asked Margaret, the moment she had shut the
drawing-room door.

“Come this way, miss,” said Dixon, opening the door of what had been
Mrs. Hale’s bed-chamber, now Margaret’s, for her father refused to sleep
there again after his wife’s death. “It’s nothing, miss,” said Dixon,
choking a little. “Only a police-inspector. He wants to see you, miss.
But I dare say, it’s about nothing at all.”

“Did he name—” asked Margaret, almost inaudibly.

“No, miss; he named nothing. He only asked if you lived here, and if he
could speak to you. Martha went to the door, and let him in; she has
shown him into master’s study. I went to him myself, to try if that
would do; but no—it’s you, miss, he wants.”

Margaret did not speak again till her hand was on the lock of the study
door. Here she turned round and said, “Take care papa does not come
down. Mr. Thornton is with him now.”

The inspector was almost daunted by the haughtiness of her manner as she
entered. There was something of indignation expressed in her
countenance, but so kept down and controlled, that it gave her a superb
air of disdain. There was no surprise, no curiosity. She stood awaiting
the opening of his business there. Not a question did she ask.

“I beg your pardon, ma’am, but my duty obliges me to ask you a few plain
questions. A man has died at the Infirmary, in consequence of a fall,
received at Outwood station, between the hours of five and six on
Thursday evening, the twenty-sixth instant. At the time, this fall did
not seem of much consequence; but it was rendered fatal, the doctors
say, by the presence of some internal complaint, and the man’s own habit
of drinking.”

The large dark eyes, gazing straight into the inspector’s face, dilated
a little. Otherwise there was no motion perceptible to his experienced
observation. Her lips swelled out into a richer curve than ordinary,
owing to the enforced tension of the muscles, but he did not know what
was their usual appearance, so as to recognise the unwonted sullen
defiance of the firm sweeping lines. She never blenched or trembled. She
fixed him with her eye. Now—as he paused before going on, she said,
almost as if she would encourage him in telling his tale—“Well—go on!”

“It is supposed that an inquest will have to be held; there is some
slight evidence to prove that the blow, or push, or scuffle that caused
the fall, was provoked by this poor fellow’s half-tipsy impertinence to
a young lady, walking with the man who pushed the deceased over the edge
of the platform. This much was observed by some one on the platform,
who, however, thought no more about the matter, as the blow seemed of
slight consequence. There is also some reason to identify the lady with
yourself; in which case—”

“I was not there,” said Margaret, still keeping her expressionless eyes
fixed on his face, with the unconscious look of a sleep-walker.

The inspector bowed but did not speak. The lady standing before him
showed no emotion, no fluttering fear, no anxiety, no desire to end the
interview. The information he had received was very vague; one of the
porters, rushing out to be in readiness for the train, had seen a
scuffle, at the other end of the platform, between Leonards and a
gentleman accompanied by a lady, but heard no noise; and before the
train had got to its full speed after starting, he had been almost
knocked down by the headlong run of the enraged half-intoxicated
Leonards, swearing and cursing awfully. He had not thought any more
about it, till his evidence was routed out by the inspector, who, on
making some farther inquiry at the railroad station, had heard from the
station-master that a young lady and gentleman had been there about that
hour—the lady remarkably handsome—and said, by some grocer’s assistant
present at the time, to be a Miss Hale, living at Crampton, whose family
dealt at his shop. There was no certainty that the one lady and
gentleman were identical with the other pair, but there was great
probability. Leonards himself had gone, half-mad with rage and pain, to
the nearest gin-palace for comfort; and his tipsy words had not been
attended to by the busy waiters there; they, however, remembered his
starting up and cursing himself for not having sooner thought of the
electric telegraph, for some purpose unknown; and they believed that he
left with the idea of going there. On his way, overcome by pain or
drink, he had lain down in the road, where the police had found him and
taken him to the Infirmary: there he had never recovered sufficient
consciousness to give any distinct account of his fall, although once or
twice he had had glimmerings of sense sufficient to make the authorities
send for the nearest magistrate, in hopes that he might be able to take
down the dying man’s deposition of the cause of his death. But when the
magistrate had come, he was rambling about being at sea, and mixing up
names of captains and lieutenants in an indistinct manner with those of
his fellow porters at the railway; and his last words were a curse on
the “Cornish trick” which had, he said, made him a hundred pounds poorer
than he ought to have been. The inspector ran all this over in his
mind—the vagueness of the evidence to prove that Margaret had been at
the station—the unflinching, calm denial which she gave to such a
supposition. She stood awaiting his next word with a composure that
appeared supreme.

“Then, madam, I have your denial that you were the lady accompanying the
gentleman who struck the blow, or gave the push, which caused the death
of this poor man?”

A quick, sharp pain went through Margaret’s brain. “Oh God! that I knew
Frederick were safe!” A deep observer of human countenances might have
seen the momentary agony shoot out of her great gloomy eyes, like the
torture of some creature brought to bay. But the inspector though a very
keen, was not a very deep observer. He was a little struck,
notwithstanding, by the form of the answer, which sounded like a
mechanical repetition of her first reply—not changed and modified in
shape so as to meet his last question.

“I was not there,” said she, slowly and heavily. And all this time she
never closed her eyes, or ceased from that glassy, dream-like stare. His
quick suspicions were aroused by this dull echo of her former denial. It
was as if she had forced herself to one untruth, and had been stunned
out of all power of varying it.

He put up his book of notes in a very deliberate manner. Then he looked
up; she had not moved any more than if she had been some great Egyptian
statue.

“I hope you will not think me impertinent when I say, that I may have to
call on you again. I may have to summon you to appear on the inquest,
and prove an alibi, if my witnesses” (it was but one who had recognised
her) “persist in deposing to your presence at the unfortunate event.” He
looked at her sharply. She was still perfectly quiet—no change of
colour, or darker shadow of guilt, on her proud face. He thought to have
seen her wince: he did not know Margaret Hale. He was a little abashed
by her real composure. It must have been a mistake of identity. He went
on:

“It is very unlikely, ma’am, that I shall have to do anything of the
kind. I hope you will excuse me for doing what is only my duty, although
it may appear impertinent.”

Margaret bowed her head as he went towards the door. Her lips were stiff
and dry. She could not speak even the common words of farewell. But
suddenly she walked forwards, and opened the study door, and preceded
him to the door of the house, which she threw wide open for his exit.
She kept her eyes upon him in the same dull, fixed manner, until he was
fairly out of the house. She shut the door, and went half-way into the
study; then turned back, as if moved by some passionate impulse, and
locked the door inside.

Then she went into the study, paused—tottered forward—paused
again—swayed for an instant where she stood, and fell prone on the
floor in a dead swoon.




CHAPTER XXXV.

EXPIATION.

    “There’s nought so finely spun
    But it cometh to the sun.”


Mr. Thornton sate on and on. He felt that his company gave pleasure to
Mr. Hale; and was touched by the half-spoken wishful entreaty that he
would remain a little longer—the plaintive “Don’t go yet,” which his
poor friend put forth from time to time. He wondered Margaret did not
return; but it was with no view of seeing her that he lingered. For the
hour—and in the presence of one who was so thoroughly feeling the
nothingness of earth—he was reasonable and self-controlled. He was
deeply interested in all her father said

    “Of death, and of the heavy lull,
    And of the brain that has grown dull.”

It was curious how the presence of Mr. Thornton had power over Mr. Hale
to make him unlock the secret thoughts which he kept shut up even from
Margaret. Whether it was that her sympathy would be so keen, and show
itself in so lively a manner, that he was afraid of the reaction upon
himself, or whether it was that to his speculative mind all kinds of
doubts presented themselves at such a time, pleading and crying aloud to
be resolved into certainties, and that he knew she would have shrunk
from the expression of any such doubts—nay, from him himself as capable
of conceiving them—whatever was the reason, he could unburden himself
better to Mr. Thornton than to her of all the thoughts and fancies and
fears that had been frost-bound in his brain till now. Mr. Thornton said
very little; but every sentence he uttered added to Mr. Hale’s reliance
and regard for him. Was it that he paused in the expression of some
remembered agony, Mr. Thornton’s two or three words would complete the
sentence, and show how deeply its meaning was entered into. Was it a
doubt—a fear—a wandering uncertainty seeking rest, but finding
none—so tear-blinded were its eyes—Mr. Thornton, instead of being
shocked, seemed to have passed through that very stage of thought
himself, and could suggest where the exact ray of light was to be found,
which should make the dark places plain. Man of action as he was, busy
in the world’s great battle, there was a deeper religion binding him to
God in his heart, in spite of his strong wilfulness, through all his
mistakes, than Mr. Hale had ever dreamed. They never spoke of such
things again, as it happened; but this one conversation made them
peculiar people to each other; knit them together, in a way which no
loose indiscriminate talking about sacred things can ever accomplish.
When all are admitted, how can there be a Holy of Holies?

And all this while, Margaret lay as still and white as death on the
study floor! She had sunk under her burden. It had been heavy in weight
and long carried; and she had been very meek and patient, till all at
once her faith had given way, and she had groped in vain for help! There
was a pitiful contraction of suffering upon her beautiful brows,
although there was no other sign of consciousness remaining. The
mouth—a little while ago, so sullenly projected in defiance—was
relaxed and livid.

    “E par che de la sua labbia si mova
    Uno spirto soave e pien d’amore,
    Chi va dicendo a l’anima: sospira!”

The first symptom of returning life was a quivering about the lips—a
little mute soundless attempt at speech; but the eyes were still closed;
and the quivering sank into stillness. Then, feebly leaning on her arms
for an instant to steady herself, Margaret gathered herself up, and
rose. Her comb had fallen out of her hair; and with an intuitive desire
to efface the traces of weakness, and bring herself into order again,
she sought for it, although from time to time, in the course of the
search, she had to sit down and recover strength. Her head drooped
forwards—her hands meekly laid one upon the other—she tried to recall
the force of her temptation, by endeavouring to remember the details
which had thrown her into such deadly fright; but she could not. She
only understood two facts—that Frederick had been in danger of being
pursued and detected in London, as not only guilty of manslaughter, but
as the more unpardonable leader of the mutiny, and that she had lied to
save him. There was one comfort; her lie had saved him, if only by
gaining some additional time. If the inspector came again to-morrow,
after she had received the letter she longed for to assure her of her
brother’s safety, she would brave shame, and stand in her bitter
penance—she the lofty Margaret—acknowledging before a crowded
justice-room, if need were, that she had been as “a dog, and done this
thing.” But if he came before she heard from Frederick; if he returned,
as he had half threatened, in a few hours, why! she would tell that lie
again; though how the words would come out, after all this terrible
pause for reflection and self-reproach, without betraying her falsehood,
she did not know, she could not tell. But her repetition of it would
gain time—time for Frederick.

She was roused by Dixon’s entrance into the room; she had just been
letting out Mr. Thornton.

He had hardly gone ten steps in the street, before a passing omnibus
stopped close by him, and a man got down, and came up to him, touching
his hat as he did so. It was the police-inspector.

Mr. Thornton had obtained for him his first situation in the police, and
had heard from time to time of the progress of his protégé, but they had
not often met, and at first Mr. Thornton did not remember him.

“My name is Watson—George Watson, sir, that you got——”

“Ah, yes! Why you are getting on famously, I hear.”

“Yes, sir. I ought to thank you, sir. But it is on a little matter of
business I made so bold as to speak to you now. I believe you were the
magistrate who attended to take down the deposition of a poor man who
died in the Infirmary last night.”

“Yes,” replied Mr. Thornton. “I went and heard some kind of a rambling
statement, which the clerk said was of no great use. I’m afraid he was
but a drunken fellow, though there is no doubt he came to his death by
violence at last. One of my mother’s servants was engaged to him, I
believe, and she is in great distress to-day. What about him?”

“Why, sir, his death is oddly mixed up with somebody in the house I saw
you coming out of just now; it was a Mr. Hales’s I believe.”

“Yes!” said Mr. Thornton, turning sharp round and looking into the
inspector’s face with sudden interest. “What about it?”

“Why, sir, it seems to me that I have got a pretty distinct chain of
evidence, inculpating a gentleman who was walking with Miss Hale that
night at the Outwood station, as the man who struck or pushed Leonards
off the platform and so caused his death. But the young lady denies that
she was there at the time.”

“Miss Hale denies she was there!” repeated Mr. Thornton in an altered
voice. “Tell me, what evening was it? What time?”

“About six o’clock, on the evening of Thursday, the twenty-sixth.”

They walked on, side by side, in silence for a minute or two. The
inspector was the first to speak.

“You see, sir, there is like to be a coroner’s inquest; and I’ve got a
young man who is pretty positive,—at least he was at first;—since he
has heard of the young lady’s denial, he says he should not like to
swear; but still he’s pretty positive that he saw Miss Hale at the
station, walking about with a gentleman, not five minutes before the
time, when one of the porters saw a scuffle, which he set down to some
of Leonards’ impudence—but which led to the fall which caused his
death. And seeing you come out of the very house, sir, I thought I might
make bold to ask if—you see, it’s always awkward having to do with
cases of disputed identity, and one doesn’t like to doubt the word of a
respectable young woman unless one has strong proof to the contrary.”

“And she denied having been at the station that evening!” repeated Mr.
Thornton, in a low, brooding tone.

“Yes, sir, twice over, as distinct as could be. I told her I should call
again, but seeing you just as I was on my way back from questioning the
young man who said it was her, I thought I would ask your advice, both
as the magistrate who saw Leonards on his death-bed, and as the
gentleman who got me my berth in the force.”

“You were quite right,” said Mr. Thornton. “Don’t take any steps till
you have seen me again.”

“The young lady will expect me to call, from what I said.”

“I only want to delay you an hour. It’s now three. Come to my warehouse
at four.”

“Very well, sir!”

And they parted company. Mr. Thornton hurried to his warehouse, and,
sternly forbidding his clerks to allow any one to interrupt him, he went
his way to his own private room, and locked the door. Then he indulged
himself in the torture of thinking it all over, and realising every
detail. How could he have lulled himself into the unsuspicious calm in
which her tearful image had mirrored itself not two hours before, till
he had weakly pitied her and yearned towards her, and forgotten the
savage, distrustful jealousy with which the sight of her—and that
unknown to him—at such an hour—in such a place—had inspired him! How
could one so pure have stooped from her decorous and noble manner of
bearing! But was it decorous—was it? He hated himself for the idea
that forced itself upon him, just for an instant—no more—and yet,
while it was present, thrilled him with its old potency of attraction
towards her image. And then this falsehood—how terrible must be some
dread of shame to be revealed—for, after all, the provocation given by
such a man as Leonards was, when excited by drinking, might, in all
probability, be more than enough to justify any one who came forward to
state the circumstances openly and without reserve! How creeping and
deadly that fear which could bow down the truthful Margaret to
falsehood! He could almost pity her. What would be the end of it? She
could not have considered all she was entering upon; if there was an
inquest and the young man came forward. Suddenly he started up. There
should be no inquest. He would save Margaret. He would take the
responsibility of preventing the inquest, the issue of which, from the
uncertainty of the medical testimony (which he had vaguely heard the
night before, from the surgeon in attendance), could be but doubtful;
the doctors had discovered an internal disease far advanced, and sure to
prove fatal; they had stated that death might have been accelerated by
the fall, or by the subsequent drinking and exposure to cold. If he had
but known how Margaret would have become involved in the affair—if he
had but foreseen that he would have stained her whiteness by a
falsehood, he could have saved her by a word; for the question, of
inquest or no inquest, had hung trembling in the balance only the night
before. Miss Hale might love another—was indifferent and contemptuous
to him—but he would yet do her faithful acts of service of which she
should never know. He might despise her, but the woman whom he had once
loved should be kept from shame; and shame it would be to pledge herself
to a lie in a public court, or otherwise to stand and acknowledge her
reason for desiring darkness rather than light.

Very gray and stern did Mr. Thornton look, as he passed out through his
wondering clerks. He was away about half an hour; and scarcely less
stern did he look when he returned, although his errand had been
successful.

He wrote two lines on a slip of paper, put it in an envelope, and sealed
it up. This he gave to one of the clerks, saying:—

“I appointed Watson—he who was a packer in the warehouse, and who went
into the police—to call on me at four o’clock. I have just met a
gentleman from Liverpool who wishes to see me before he leaves town.
Take care to give this note to Watson when he calls.”

The note contained these words:

“There will be no inquest. Medical evidence not sufficient to justify
it. Take no further steps. I have not seen the coroner; but I will take
the responsibility.”

“Well,” thought Watson, “it relieves me from an awkward job. None of my
witnesses seemed certain of anything except the young woman. She was
clear and distinct enough; the porter at the railroad had seen a
scuffle! or when he found it was likely to bring him in as a witness,
then it might not have been a scuffle, only a little larking, and
Leonards might have jumped off the platform himself;—he would not
stick firm to anything. And Jennings, the grocer’s shopman,—well, he
was not quite so bad, but I doubt if I could have got him up to an oath
after he heard that Miss Hale flatly denied it. It would have been a
troublesome job and no satisfaction. And now I must go and tell them
they won’t be wanted.”

He accordingly presented himself again at Mr. Hale’s that evening. Her
father and Dixon would fain have persuaded Margaret to go to bed; but
they, neither of them, knew the reason for her low continued refusals to
do so. Dixon had learnt part of the truth—but only part. Margaret would
not tell any human being of what she had said, and she did not reveal
the fatal termination to Leonards’ fall from the platform. So Dixon’s
curiosity combined with her allegiance to urge Margaret to go to rest,
which her appearance, as she lay on the sofa, showed but too clearly
that she required. She did not speak except when spoken to; she tried to
smile back in reply to her father’s anxious looks and words of tender
inquiry; but, instead of a smile, the wan lips resolved themselves into
a sigh. He was so miserably uneasy that, at last, she consented to go
into her own room, and prepare for going to bed. She was indeed inclined
to give up the idea that the inspector would call again that night, as
it was already past nine o’clock.

She stood by her father, holding on to the back of his chair.

“You will go to bed soon, papa, won’t you? Don’t sit up alone!”

What his answer was she did not hear; the words were lost in the far
smaller sound that magnified itself to her fears, and filled her brain.
There was a low ring at the door-bell.

She kissed her father and glided down stairs, with a rapidity of motion
of which no one would have thought her capable, who had seen her the
minute before. She put aside Dixon.

“Don’t come; I will open the door. I know it is him—I can—I must
manage it all myself.”

“As you please, miss!” said Dixon, testily; but in a moment afterwards,
she added, “But you’re not fit for it. You are more dead than alive.”

“Am I?” said Margaret, turning round and showing her eyes all aglow with
strange fire, her cheeks flushed, though her lips were baked and livid
still.

She opened the door to the Inspector, and preceded him into the study.
She placed the candle on the table, and snuffed it carefully, before she
turned round and faced him.

“You are late!” said she. “Well?” She held her breath for the answer.

“I am sorry to have given any unnecessary trouble, ma’am; for, after
all, they’ve given up all thoughts of holding an inquest. I have had
other work to do and other people to see, or I should have been here
before now.”

“Then it is ended,” said Margaret. “There is to be no further enquiry.”

“I believe I’ve got Mr. Thornton’s note about me,” said the Inspector,
fumbling in his pocket-book.

“Mr. Thornton’s!” said Margaret.

“Yes! he’s a magistrate—ah! here it is.”

She could not see to read it—no, not although she was close to the
candle. The words swam before her. But she held it in her hand, and
looked at it as if she were intently studying it.

“I’m sure, ma’am, it’s a great weight off my mind; for the evidence was
so uncertain, you see, that the man had received any blow at all, and if
any question of identity came in, it so complicated the case, as I told
Mr. Thornton——”

“Mr. Thornton!” said Margaret again.

“I met him this morning, just as he was coming out of this house, and,
as he’s an old friend of mine, besides being the magistrate who saw
Leonards last night, I made bold to tell him of my difficulty.”

Margaret sighed deeply. She did not want to hear any more; she was
afraid alike of what she had heard, and of what she might hear. She
wished that the man would go. She forced herself to speak.

“Thank you for calling. It is very late. I dare say it is past ten
o’clock. Oh! here is the note!” she continued, suddenly interpreting the
meaning of the hand held out to receive it. He was putting it up, when
she said, “I think it is a cramped, dazzling sort of writing. I could
not read it; will you just read it to me?”

He read it aloud to her.

“Thank you. You told Mr. Thornton that I was not there?”

“Oh, of course, ma’am. I’m sorry now that I acted upon information,
which seems to have been so erroneous. At first the young man was so
positive; and now he says that he doubted all along, and hopes that his
mistake won’t have occasioned you such annoyance as to lose their shop
your custom. Good night, ma’am.”

“Good night.” She rang the bell for Dixon to show him out. As Dixon
returned up the passage Margaret passed her swiftly.

“It is all right!” said she, without looking at Dixon; and before the
woman could follow her with further questions she had sped upstairs, and
entered her bed-chamber, and bolted her door.

She threw herself, dressed as she was, upon her bed. She was too much
exhausted to think. Half-an-hour or more elapsed before the cramped
nature of her position, and the chilliness, supervening upon great
fatigue, had the power to rouse her numbed faculties. Then she began to
recall, to combine, to wonder. The first idea that presented itself to
her was, that all this sickening alarm on Frederick’s behalf was over;
that the strain was past. The next was a wish to remember every word of
the Inspector’s which related to Mr. Thornton. When had he seen him?
What had he said? What had Mr. Thornton done? What were the exact words
of his note? And until she could recollect, even to the placing or
omitting an article, the very expressions which he had used in the note,
her mind refused to go on with its progress. But the next conviction she
came to was clear enough;—Mr. Thornton had seen her close to Outwood
station on the fatal Thursday night, and had been told of her denial
that she was there. She stood a liar in his eyes. She was a liar. But
she had no thought of penitence before God; nothing but chaos and night
surrounded the one lurid fact that, in Mr. Thornton’s eyes, she was
degraded. She cared not to think, even to herself, of how much of excuse
she might plead. That had nothing to do with Mr. Thornton; she never
dreamed that he, or any one else, could find cause for suspicion in what
was so natural as her accompanying her brother; but what was really
false and wrong was known to him, and he had a right to judge her. “Oh,
Frederick! Frederick!” she cried, “what have I not sacrificed for you!”
Even when she fell asleep her thoughts were compelled to travel the same
circle, only with exaggerated and monstrous circumstances of pain.

When she awoke a new idea flashed upon her with all the brightness of
the morning. Mr. Thornton had learnt her falsehood before he went to the
coroner; that suggested the thought, that he had possibly been
influenced so to do with a view of sparing her the repetition of her
denial. But she pushed this notion on one side with the sick wilfulness
of a child. If it were so, she felt no gratitude to him, as it only
showed her how keenly he must have seen that she was disgraced already,
before he took such unwonted pains to spare her any further trial of
truthfulness, which had already failed so signally. She would have gone
through the whole—she would have perjured herself to save Frederick,
rather—far rather—than Mr. Thornton should have had the knowledge that
prompted him to interfere to save her. What ill-fate brought him in
contact with the Inspector? What made him be the very magistrate sent
for to receive Leonards’ deposition? What had Leonards said? How much of
it was intelligible to Mr. Thornton, who might already, for aught she
knew, be aware of the old accusation against Frederick, through their
mutual friend, Mr. Bell? If so, he had striven to save the son, who came
in defiance of the law to attend his mother’s death-bed. And under this
idea she could feel grateful—not yet, if ever she should, if his
interference had been prompted by contempt. Oh! had any one just cause
to feel contempt for her? Mr. Thornton, above all people, on whom she
had looked down from her imaginary heights till now! She suddenly found
herself at his feet, and was strangely distressed at her fall. She
shrank from following out the premises to their conclusion, and so
acknowledging to herself how much she valued his respect and good
opinion. Whenever this idea presented itself to her at the end of a long
avenue of thoughts, she turned away from following that path—she would
not believe in it.

It was later than she fancied, for in the agitation of the previous
night, she had forgotten to wind up her watch; and Mr. Hale had given
especial orders that she was not to be disturbed by the usual awakening.
By and by the door opened cautiously, and Dixon put her head in.
Perceiving that Margaret was awake, she came forwards with a letter.

“Here’s something to do you good, miss. A letter from Master Frederick.”

“Thank you, Dixon. How late it is!”

She spoke very languidly, and suffered Dixon to lay it on the
counterpane before her, without putting out a hand to take it.

“You want your breakfast, I’m sure. I will bring it you in a minute.
Master has got the tray all ready, I know.”

Margaret did not reply; she let her go; she felt that she must be alone
before she could open that letter. She opened it at last. The first
thing that caught her eye was the date two days earlier than she
received it. He had then written when he had promised, and their alarm
might have been spared. But she would read the letter and see. It was
hasty enough, but perfectly satisfactory. He had seen Henry Lennox, who
knew enough of the case to shake his head over it, in the first
instance, and tell him he had done a very daring thing in returning to
England, with such an accusation, backed by such powerful influence,
hanging over him. But when they had come to talk it over, Mr. Lennox had
acknowledged that there might be some chance of his acquittal, if he
could but prove his statements by credible witnesses—that in such case
it might be worth while to stand his trial, otherwise it would be a
great risk. He would examine—he would take every pains. “It struck me,”
said Frederick, “that your introduction, little sister of mine, went a
long way. Is it so? He made so many inquiries, I can assure you. He
seemed a sharp, intelligent fellow, and in good practice too, to judge
from the signs of business and the number of clerks about him. But these
may be only lawyer’s dodges. I have just caught a packet on the point of
sailing—I am off in five minutes. I may have to come back to England
again on this business, so keep my visit secret. I shall send my father
some rare old sherry, such as you cannot buy in England (such stuff as
I’ve got in the bottle before me)! He needs something of the kind—my
dear love to him—God bless him. I’m sure—here’s my cab. P.S.—What an
escape that was! Take care you don’t breathe of my having been—not even
to the Shaws.”

Margaret turned to the envelope: it was marked “Too late.” The letter
had probably been trusted to some careless waiter, who had forgotten to
post it. Oh! what slight cobwebs of chances stand between us and
Temptation! Frederick had been safe, and out of England twenty, nay,
thirty hours ago; and it was only about seventeen hours since she had
told a falsehood to baffle pursuit, which even then would have been
vain. How faithless she had been! Where now was her proud motto, “Fais
ce que dois, advienne que pourra?” If she had but dared to bravely tell
the truth as regarded herself, defying them to find out what she refused
to tell concerning another, how light of heart she would now have felt!
Not humbled before God, as having failed in trust towards Him; not
degraded and abased in Mr. Thornton’s sight. She caught herself up at
this with a miserable tremor; here was she classing his low opinion of
her alongside with the displeasure of God. How was it that he haunted
her imagination so persistently? What could it be? Why did she care for
what he thought, in spite of all her pride; in spite of herself? She
believed that she could have borne the sense of Almighty displeasure,
because He knew all, and could read her penitence, and hear her cries
for help in time to come. But Mr. Thornton—why did she tremble, and
hide her face in the pillow? What strong feeling had overtaken her at
last?

She sprang out of bed and prayed long and earnestly. It soothed and
comforted her so to open her heart. But as soon as she reviewed her
position she found the sting was still there; that she was not good
enough, nor pure enough to be indifferent to the lowered opinion of a
fellow creature: that the thought of how he must be looking upon her
with contempt, stood between her and her sense of wrong-doing. She took
her letter in to her father as soon as she was drest. There was so
slight an allusion to their alarm at the railroad station, that Mr. Hale
passed over it without paying any attention to it. Indeed, beyond the
mere fact of Frederick having sailed undiscovered and unsuspected, he
did not gather much from the letter at the time, he was so uneasy about
Margaret’s pallid looks. She seemed continually on the point of weeping.

“You are sadly overdone, Margaret. It is no wonder. But you must let me
nurse you now.”

He made her lie down on the sofa, and went for a shawl to cover her
with. His tenderness released her tears; and she cried bitterly.

“Poor child!—poor child!” said he, looking fondly at her, as she lay
with her face to the wall, shaking with her sobs. After a while they
ceased, and she began to wonder whether she durst give herself the
relief of telling her father of all her trouble. But there were more
reasons against it than for it. The only one for it was the relief to
herself; and against it was the thought that it would add materially to
her father’s nervousness, if it were indeed necessary for Frederick to
come to England again; that he would dwell on the circumstance of his
son’s having caused the death of a man, however unwittingly and
unwillingly; that this knowledge would perpetually recur to trouble him,
in various shapes of exaggeration and distortion from the simple truth.
And about her own great fault—he would be distressed beyond measure at
her want of courage and faith, yet perpetually troubled to make excuses
for her. Formerly Margaret would have come to him as priest as well as
father, to tell him of her temptation and her sin; but latterly they had
not spoken much on such subjects; and she knew not how, in his change of
opinions, he would reply if the depth of her soul called unto his. No;
she would keep her secret, and bear the burden alone. Alone she would go
before God, and cry for His absolution. Alone she would endure her
disgraced position in the opinion of Mr. Thornton. She was unspeakably
touched by the tender efforts of her father to think of cheerful
subjects on which to talk, and so to take her thoughts away from
dwelling on all that had happened of late. It was some months since he
had been so talkative as he was this day. He would not let her sit up,
and offended Dixon desperately by insisting on waiting upon her himself.

At last she smiled; a poor, weak little smile; but it gave him the
truest pleasure.

“It seems strange to think, that what gives us most hope for the future
should be called Dolores,” said Margaret. The remark was more in
character with her father than with her usual self; but to-day they
seemed to have changed natures.

“Her mother was a Spaniard, I believe: that accounts for her religion.
Her father was a stiff Presbyterian when I knew him. But it is a very
soft and pretty name.”

“How young she is!—younger by fourteen months than I am. Just the age
that Edith was when she was engaged to Captain Lennox. Papa, we will go
and see them in Spain.”

He shook his head. But he said, “If you wish it Margaret. Only let us
come back here. It would seem unfair—unkind to your mother, who always,
I’m afraid, disliked Milton so much, if we left it now she is lying
here, and cannot go with us. No, dear; you shall go and see them, and
bring me back a report of my Spanish daughter.”

“No, papa, I won’t go without you. Who is to take care of you when I am
gone?”

“I should like to know which of us is taking care of the other. But if
you went, I should persuade Mr. Thornton to let me give him double
lessons. We would work up the classics famously. That would be a
perpetual interest. You might go on, and see Edith at Corfu, if you
liked.”

Margaret did not speak all at once. Then she said rather gravely: “Thank
you, papa. But I don’t want to go. We will hope that Mr. Lennox will
manage so well, that Frederick may bring Dolores to see us when they are
married. And as for Edith, the regiment won’t remain much longer in
Corfu. Perhaps we shall see both of them here before another year is
out.”

Mr. Hale’s cheerful subjects had come to an end. Some painful
recollections had stolen across his mind, and driven him into silence.
By and by Margaret said:

“Papa—did you see Nicholas Higgins at the funeral? He was there, and
Mary too. Poor fellow! it was his way of showing sympathy. He has a good
warm heart under his bluff abrupt ways.”

“I am sure of it,” replied Mr. Hale. “I saw it all along, even while you
tried to persuade me that he was all sorts of bad things. We will go and
see them to-morrow, if you are strong enough to walk so far.”

“Oh yes. I want to see them. We did not pay Mary—or rather she refused
to take it, Dixon says. We will go so as to catch him just after his
dinner, and before he goes to his work.”

Towards evening Mr. Hale said:

“I half expected Mr. Thornton would have called. He spoke of a book
yesterday which he had, and which I wanted to see. He said he would try
and bring it to-day.”

Margaret sighed. She knew he would not come. He would be too delicate to
run the chance of meeting her, while her shame must be so fresh in his
memory. The very mention of his name renewed her trouble, and produced a
relapse into the feeling of depressed, pre-occupied exhaustion. She gave
way to listless languor. Suddenly it struck her that this was a strange
manner to show her patience, or to reward her father for his watchful
care of her all through the day. She sate up, and offered to read aloud.
His eyes were failing, and he gladly accepted her proposal. She read
well: she gave the due emphasis; but had any one asked her, when she had
ended, the meaning of what she had been reading, she could not have
told. She was smitten with a feeling of ingratitude to Mr. Thornton,
inasmuch as, in the morning, she had refused to accept the kindness he
had shown her in making further inquiry from the medical men, so as to
obviate any inquest being held. Oh! she was grateful! She had been
cowardly and false, and had shown her cowardliness and falsehood in
action that could not be recalled; but she was not ungrateful. It sent a
glow to her heart, to know she could feel towards one who had reason to
despise her. His cause for contempt was so just, that she should have
respected him less if she had thought he did not feel contempt. It was a
pleasure to feel how thoroughly she respected him. He could not prevent
her doing that; it was the one comfort in all this misery.

Late in the evening, the expected book arrived, “with Mr. Thornton’s
kind regards, and wishes to know how Mr. Hale is.”

“Say that I am much better, Dixon, but that Miss Hale—”

“No, papa,” said Margaret, eagerly—“don’t say anything about me. He
does not ask.”

“My dear child, how you are shivering!” said her father, a few minutes
afterwards. “You must go to bed directly. You have turned quite pale!”

Margaret did not refuse to go, though she was loth to leave her father
alone. She needed the relief of solitude after a day of busy thinking,
and busier repenting.

But she seemed much as usual the next day; the lingering gravity and
sadness, and the occasional absence of mind, were not unnatural symptoms
in the early days of grief. And almost in proportion to her
re-establishment in health, was her father’s relapse into his abstracted
musings upon the wife he had lost, and the past era in his life that was
closed to him for ever.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

UNION NOT ALWAYS STRENGTH.

    “The steps of the bearers, heavy and slow,
    The sobs of the mourners, deep and low.”
              SHELLEY.


At the time arranged the previous day, they set out on their walk to see
Nicholas Higgins and his daughter. They both were reminded of their
recent loss, by a strange kind of shyness in their new habiliments, and
in the fact that it was the first time, for many weeks, that they had
deliberately gone out together. They drew very close to each other in
unspoken sympathy.

Nicholas was sitting by the fire-side in his accustomed corner; but he
had not his accustomed pipe. He was leaning his head upon his hand, his
arm resting on his knee. He did not get up when he saw them, though
Margaret could read the welcome in his eye.

“Sit ye down, sit ye down. Fire’s welly out,” said he, giving it a
vigorous poke, as if to turn attention away from himself. He was rather
disorderly, to be sure, with a black unshaven beard of several days’
growth, making his pale face look yet paler, and a jacket which would
have been all the better for patching.

“We thought we should have a good chance of finding you, just after
dinner-time,” said Margaret.

“We have had our sorrows too, since we saw you,” said Mr. Hale.

“Ay, ay. Sorrows is more plentiful than dinners just now; I reckon, my
dinner hour stretches all o’er the day; yo’re pretty sure of finding
me.”

“Are you out of work?” asked Margaret.

“Ay,” he replied shortly. Then, after a moment’s silence, he added,
looking up for the first time: “I’m not wanting brass. Dunno yo’ think
it. Bess, poor lass, had a little stock under her pillow, ready to slip
into my hand, last moment, and Mary is fustian-cutting. But I’m out of
work a’ the same.”

“We owe Mary some money,” said Mr. Hale, before Margaret’s sharp
pressure on his arm could arrest the words.

“If hoo takes it, I’ll turn her out o’ doors. I’ll bide inside these
four walls, and she’ll bide out. That’s a’.”

“But we owe her many thanks for her kind service,” began Mr. Hale again.

“I ne’er thanken your daughter theer for her deeds o’ love to my poor
wench. I ne’er could find th’ words. I’se have to begin to try now, if
yo’ start making an ado about what little Mary could sarve yo’.”

“Is it because of the strike you’re out of work?” asked Margaret gently.

“Strike’s ended. It’s o’er for this time. I’m out o’ work because I
ne’er asked for it. And I ne’er asked for it, because good words is
scarce, and bad words is plentiful.”

He was in a mood to take a surly pleasure in giving answers that were
like riddles. But Margaret saw that he would like to be asked for the
explanation.

“And good words are—?”

“Asking for work. I reckon them’s almost the best words that men can
say. ‘Gi’ me work’ means ‘and I’ll do it like a man.’ Them’s good
words.”

“And bad words are refusing you work when you ask for it.”

“Ay. Bad words is saying ‘Aha, my fine chap! Yo’ve been true to yo’r
order, and I’ll be true to mine. Yo’ did the best yo’ could for them as
wanted help; that’s yo’re way of being true to yo’re kind: and I’ll be
true to mine. Yo’ve been a poor fool, as knowed no better nor be a true
faithful fool. So go and be d—d to yo’. There’s no work for yo’ here.’
Them’s bad words. I’m not a fool; and if I was, folk ought to ha’ taught
me how to be wise after their fashion. I could m’appen ha’ learnt, if
any one had tried to teach me.”

“Would it not be worth while,” said Mr. Hale, “to ask your old master if
he would take you back again? It might be a poor chance, but it would be
a chance.”

He looked up again, with a sharp glance at the questioner; and then
tittered a low and bitter laugh.

“Measter! if it’s no offence, I’ll ask yo’ a question or two in my
turn.”

“You’re quite welcome,” said Mr. Hale.

“I reckon yo’n some way of earning your bread. Folk seldom lives i’
Milton just for pleasure, if they can live anywhere else.”

“You are quite right. I have some independent property, but my intention
in settling in Milton was to become a private tutor.”

“To teach folk. Well! I reckon they pay yo’ for teaching them, dunnot
they?”

“Yes,” replied Mr. Hale, smiling. “I teach in order to get paid.”

“And them that pays yo’, dun they tell yo’ whatten to do, or whatten not
to do wi’ the money they gives you in just payment for your pains—in
fair exchange like?”

“No; to be sure not!”

“They dunnot say, ‘Yo’ may have a brother, or a friend as dear as a
brother, who wants this here brass for a purpose both yo’ and he think
right; but yo’ mun promise not give it to him. Yo’ may see a good use,
as yo’ think, to put yo’r money to; but we don’t think it good, and so
if yo’ spend it a-thatens we’ll just leave off dealing with yo’.’ They
dunnot say that, dun they?”

“No: to be sure not!”

“Would yo’ stand it if they did?”

“It would be some very hard pressure that would make me even think of
submitting to such dictation.”

“There’s not the pressure on all the broad earth that would make me,”
said Nicholas Higgins. “Now yo’ve got it. Yo’ve hit the bull’s eye.
Hampers—that’s where I worked—makes their men pledge ’emselves they’ll
not give a penny to help th’ Union or keep turn-outs fro’ clemming. They
may pledge and make pledge,” continued he, scornfully; “they nobbut make
liars and hypocrites. And that’s a less sin, to my mind, to make men’s
hearts so hard that they’ll not do a kindness to them as needs it, or
help on the right and just cause, though it goes again the strong hand.
But I’ll ne’er forswear mysel’ for a’ the work the king could gi’e me.
I’m a member o’ the Union; and I think it’s the only thing to do the
workmen any good. And I’ve been a turn-out, and known what it was to
clem; so if I get a shilling, sixpence shall go to them if they axe it
from me. Consequence is, I dunnot see where I’m to get a shilling.”

“Is that rule about not contributing to the Union in force at all the
mills?” asked Margaret.

“I cannot say. It’s a new regulation at ours; and I reckon they’ll find
that they cannot stick to it. But it’s in force now. By-and-by they’ll
find out, tyrants makes liars.”

There was a little pause. Margaret was hesitating whether she should say
what was in her mind; she was unwilling to irritate one who was always
gloomy and despondent enough. At last out it came. But in her soft
tones, and with her reluctant manner, shewing that she was unwilling to
say anything unpleasant, it did not seem to annoy Higgins, only to
perplex him.

“Do you remember poor Boucher saying that the Union was a tyrant? I
think he said it was the worse tyrant of all. And I remember, at the
time I agreed with him.”

It was a long while before he spoke. He was resting his head on his two
hands, and looking down into the fire, so she could not read the
expression on his face.

“I’ll not deny but what th’ Union finds it necessary to force a man into
his own good. I’ll speak truth. A man leads a dree life who’s not i’ th’
Union. But once i’ th’ Union, his interests are taken care on better nor
he could do it for himsel’, or by himsel’, for that matter. It’s the
only way working men can get their rights, by all joining together. More
the members, more chance for each one separate man having justice done
him. Government takes care o’ fools and madmen; and if any man is
inclined to do himsel’ or his neighbour a hurt, it puts a bit of a check
on him, whether he likes it or no. That’s all we do i’ th’ Union. We
can’t clap folk into prison; but we can make a man’s life so heavy to be
borne, that he’s obliged to come in, and be wise and helpful in spite of
himsel’. Boucher were a fool all along, and ne’er a worse fool than at
th’ last.”

“He did you harm?” asked Margaret.

“Aye, that did he. We had public opinion on our side, till he and his
sort began rioting and breaking laws. It were all o’er wi’ the strike
then.”

“Then would it not have been far better to have left him alone, and not
forced him to join the Union? He did you no good; and you drove him
mad.”

“Margaret,” said her father, in a low and warning tone, for he saw the
cloud gathering on Higgins’s face.

“I like her,” said Higgins, suddenly. “Hoo speaks plain out what’s in
her mind. Hoo doesn’t comprehend th’ Union for all that. It’s a great
power: it’s our only power. I ha’ read a bit o’ poetry about a plough
going o’er a daisy, as made tears come into my eyes, afore I’d other
cause for crying. But the chap ne’er stopped driving the plough, I’se
warrant, for all he was pitiful about the daisy. He’d too much
mother-wit for that. Th’ Union’s the plough, making ready the land for
harvest-time. Such as Boucher—’twould be settin’ him up too much to
liken him to a daisy; he’s liker a weed lounging over the ground—mun
just made up their mind to be put out o’ the way. I’m sore vexed wi’ him
just now. So m’appen, I dunnot speak him fair. I could go o’er him wi’ a
plough mysel’, wi’ a’ the pleasure in life.”

“Why? What has he been doing? Anything fresh?”

“Ay, to be sure. He’s ne’er out o’ mischief, that man. First of a’ he
must go raging like a mad fool, and kick up yon riot. Then he’d to go
into hiding, where he’d a been yet, if Thornton had followed him out as
I’d hoped he would ha’ done. But Thornton, having got his own purpose,
didn’t care to go on wi’ the prosecution for the riot. So Boucher slunk
back again to his house. He ne’er showed himsel’ abroad for a day or
two. He had that grace. And then, where think ye that he went? Why, to
Hampers’. Damn him! He went wi’ his mealy-mouthed face, that turns me
sick to look at, a-asking for work, though he knowed well enough the new
rule, o’ pledging themselves to give nought to th’ Unions; nought to
help the starving turn-out! Why he’d a clemmed to death, if th’ Union
had na helped him in his pinch. There he went, ossing to promise aught,
and pledge himsel’ to aught—to tell a’ he know’d on our proceedings,
the good-for-nothing Judas! But I’ll say this for Hamper, and thank him
for it at my dying day, he drove Boucher away, and would na listen to
him—ne’er a word—though folk standing by, says the traitor cried like
a babby!”

“Oh! how shocking! how pitiful!” exclaimed Margaret. “Higgins, I don’t
know you to-day. Don’t you see how you’ve made Boucher what he is, by
driving him into the Union against his will—without his heart going
with it. You have made him what he is!”

Made him what he is! What was he?

Gathering, gathering along the narrow street, came a hollow, measured
sound; now forcing itself on their attention. Many voices were hushed
and low: many steps were heard, not moving onwards, at least not with
any rapidity or steadiness of motion, but as if circling round one spot.
Yes, there was one distinct, slow tramp of feet, which made itself a
clear path through the air, and reached their ears; the measured
laboured walk of men carrying a heavy burden. They were all drawn
towards the house-door by some irresistible impulse; impelled
thither—not by a poor curiosity, but as if by some solemn blast.

Six men walked in the middle of the road, three of them being policemen.
They carried a door, taken off its hinges, upon their shoulders, on
which lay some dead human creature; and from each side of the door there
were constant droppings. All the street turned out to see, and, seeing,
to accompany the procession, each one questioning the bearers, who
answered almost reluctantly at last, so often had they told the tale.

“We found him i’ th’ brook in the field beyond there.”

“Th’ brook!—why there’s not water enough to drown him!”

“He was a determined chap. He lay with his face downwards. He was sick
enough o’ living, choose what cause he had for it.”

Higgins crept up to Margaret’s side, and said in a weak piping kind of
voice: “It’s not John Boucher? He had na spunk enough. Sure! It’s not
John Boucher! Why, they are a’ looking this way! Listen! I’ve a singing
in my head, and I cannot hear.”

They put the door down carefully upon the stones, and all might see the
poor drowned wretch—his glassy eyes, one half-open, staring right
upwards to the sky. Owing to the position in which he had been found
lying, his face was swollen and discoloured; besides, his skin was
stained by the water in the brook, which had been used for dyeing
purposes. The fore part of his head was bald; but the hair grew thin and
long behind, and every separate lock was a conduit for water. Through
all these disfigurements, Margaret recognised John Boucher. It seemed to
her so sacrilegious to be peering into that poor distorted, agonised
face, that, by a flash of instinct, she went forwards and softly covered
the dead man’s countenance with her handkerchief. The eyes that saw her
do this followed her, as she turned away from her pious office, and were
thus led to the place where Nicholas Higgins stood, like one rooted to
the spot. The men spoke together, and then one of them came up to
Higgins, who would have fain shrunk back into his house.

“Higgins, thou knowed him! Thou mun go tell the wife. Do it gently, man,
but do it quick, for we canna leave him here long.”

“I canna go,” said Higgins. “Dunnot ask me. I canna face her.”

“Thou knows her best,” said the man. “We’n done a deal in bringing him
here—thou take thy share.”

“I canna do it,” said Higgins. “I’m welly felled wi’ seeing him. We
wasn’t friends; and now he’s dead.”

“Well, if thou wunnot thou wunnot. Some one mun though. It’s a dree
task; but it’s a chance, every minute, as she doesn’t hear on it in some
rougher way nor a person going to make her let on by degrees, as it
were.”

“Papa, do you go,” said Margaret, in a low voice.

“If I could—if I had time to think of what I had better say; but all at
once——” Margaret saw that her father was indeed unable. He was
trembling from head to foot.

“I will go,” said she.

“Bless yo’ miss, it will be a kind act; for she’s been but a sickly sort
o’ body, I hear, and few hereabouts know much on her.”

Margaret knocked at the closed door; but there was such a noise, as of
many little ill-ordered children, that she could hear no reply; indeed,
she doubted if she was heard, and as every moment of delay made her
recoil from her task more and more, she opened the door and went in,
shutting it after her, and even, unseen by the woman, fastening the
bolt.

Mrs. Boucher was sitting in a rocking-chair, on the other side of the
ill-redd-up fireplace; it looked as if the house had been untouched for
days by any effort at cleanliness.

Margaret said something, she hardly knew what, her throat and mouth were
so dry, and the children’s noise completely prevented her from being
heard. She tried again.

“How are you, Mrs. Boucher? But very poorly, I’m afraid.”

“I’ve chance o’ being well,” said she querulously. “I’m left alone to
manage these childer, and nought for to give ’em for to keep ’em quiet.
John should na ha’ left me, and me so poorly.”

“How long is it since he went away?”

“Four days sin’. No one would give him work here, and he’d to go on
tramp toward Greenfield. But he might ha’ been back afore this, or sent
me some word if he’d getten work. He might——”

“Oh, don’t blame him,” said Margaret. “He felt it deeply, I’m sure——”

“Willto’ hold thy din, and let me hear the lady speak!” addressing
herself, in no very gentle voice, to a little urchin of about a year
old. She apologetically continued to Margaret, “He’s always mithering me
for ‘daddy’ and ‘butty’; and I ha’ no butties to give him, and daddy’s
away, and forgotten us a’, I think. He’s his father’s darling, he is,”
said she, with a sudden turn of mood, and, dragging the child up to her
knee, she began kissing it fondly.

Margaret laid her hand on the woman’s arm to arrest her attention. Their
eyes met.

“Poor little fellow!” said Margaret, slowly; “he _was_ his father’s
darling.”

“He _is_ his father’s darling,” said the woman, rising hastily, and
standing face to face with Margaret. Neither of them spoke for a moment
or two. Then Mrs. Boucher began in a low growling tone, gathering in
wildness as she went on: “He _is_ his father’s darling, I say. Poor folk
can love their childer as well as rich. Why dunno yo’ speak? Why dun yo’
stare at me wi’ your great pitiful eyes? Where’s John?” Weak as she was,
she shook Margaret to force out an answer. “Oh, my God!” said she,
understanding the meaning of that tearful look. She sank back into the
chair. Margaret took up the child and put him into her arms.

“He loved him,” said she.

“Ay,” said the woman, shaking her head, “he loved us a’. We had some one
to love us once. It’s a long time ago; but when he were in life and with
us he did love us, he did. He loved this babby m’appen the best on us;
but he loved me and I loved him, though I was calling him five minutes
agone. Are yo’ sure he’s dead?” said she, trying to get up. “If it’s
only that he’s ill and like to die, they may bring him round yet. I’m
but an ailing creature mysel’—I’ve been ailing this long time.”

“But he is dead—he is drowned!”

“Folk are brought round after they’re dead-drowned. Whatten was I
thinking of, to sit still when I should be stirring mysel’? Here, whisth
thee, child—whisth thee! tak’ this, tak’ aught to play wi’, but dunnot
cry while my heart’s breaking! Oh, where is my strength gone to? Oh
John—husband!”

Margaret saved her from falling by catching her in her arms. She sate
down in the rocking chair, and held the woman upon her knees, her head
lying on Margaret’s shoulder. The other children, clustered together in
affright, began to understand the mystery of the scene; but the ideas
came slowly, for their brains were dull and languid of perception. They
set up such a cry of despair as they guessed the truth, that Margaret
knew not how to bear it. Johnny’s cry was loudest of them all, though he
knew not why he cried, poor little fellow.

The mother quivered as she lay in Margaret’s arms. Margaret heard a
noise at the door.

“Open it. Open it quick,” said she to the eldest child. “It’s bolted;
make no noise—be very still. Oh, papa, let them go upstairs very softly
and carefully, and perhaps she will not hear them. She has
fainted—that’s all.”

“It’s as well for her, poor creature,” said a woman following in the
wake of the bearers of the dead. “But yo’re not fit to hold her. Stay,
I’ll run fetch a pillow, and we’ll let her down easy on the floor.”

This helpful neighbour was a great relief to Margaret; she was evidently
a stranger to the house, a new-comer in the district, indeed; but she
was so kind and thoughtful that Margaret felt she was no longer needed;
and that it would be better, perhaps, to set an example of clearing the
house, which was filled with idle, if sympathising gazers.

She looked round for Nicholas Higgins. He was not there. So she spoke to
the woman who had taken the lead in placing Mrs. Boucher on the floor.

“Can you give all these people a hint that they had better leave in
quietness? So that when she comes round, she could only find one or two
that she knows about her. Papa, will you speak to the men, and get them
to go away. She cannot breathe, poor thing, with this crowd about her.”

Margaret was kneeling down by Mrs. Boucher and bathing her face with
vinegar; but in a few minutes she was surprised at the gush of fresh
air. She looked round, and saw a smile pass between her father and the
woman.

“What is it?” asked she.

“Only our good friend here,” replied her father, “hit on a capital
expedient for clearing the place.”

“I bid ’em begone, and each take a child with ’em, and to mind that they
were orphans, and their mother a widow. It was who could do most, and
the childer are sure of a bellyful to-day, and of kindness too. Does hoo
know how he died?”

“No,” said Margaret; “I could not tell her all at once.”

“Hoo mun be told because of th’ Inquest. See! Hoo’s coming round; shall
you or I do it? or m’appen your father would be best?”

“No; you, you,” said Margaret.

They awaited her perfect recovery in silence. Then the neighbour woman
sat down on the floor, and took Mrs. Boucher’s head and shoulders on her
lap.

“Neighbour,” said she, “your man is dead. Guess yo’ how he died?”

“He were drowned,” said Mrs. Boucher, feebly, beginning to cry for the
first time, at this rough probing of her sorrows.

“He were found drowned. He were coming home very hopeless o’ aught on
earth. He thought God could na be harder than men; m’appen not so hard;
m’appen as tender as a mother; m’appen tenderer. I’m not saying he did
right, and I’m not saying he did wrong. All I say is, may neither me nor
mine ever have his sore heart, or we may do like things.”

“He has left me alone wi’ a’ these children!” moaned the widow, less
distressed at the manner of the death than Margaret expected; but it was
of a piece with her helpless character to feel his loss as principally
affecting herself and her children.

“Not alone,” said Mr. Hale, solemnly. “Who is with you? Who will take up
your cause?” The widow opened her eyes wide, and looked at the new
speaker, of whose presence she had not been aware till then.

“Who has promised to be a father to the fatherless?” continued he.

“But I’ve getten six children, sir, and the eldest not eight years of
age. I’m not meaning for to doubt His power, sir,—only it needs a deal
o’ trust”; and she began to cry afresh.

“Hoo’ll be better able to talk to-morrow, sir,” said the neighbour.
“Best comfort now would be the feel of a child at her heart. I’m sorry
they took the babby.”

“I’ll go for it,” said Margaret. And in a few minutes she returned,
carrying Johnnie, his face all smeared with eating, and his hands loaded
with treasures in the shape of shells, and bits of crystal, and the head
of a plaster figure. She placed him on his mother’s arms.

“There!” said the woman, “now you go. They’ll cry together, and comfort
together, better nor any one but a child can do. I’ll stop with her as
long as I’m needed, and if you come to-morrow, you’ can have a deal o’
wise talk with her, that she’s not up to to-day.”

As Margaret and her father went slowly up the street, she paused at
Higgins’s closed door.

“Shall we go in?” asked her father. “I was thinking of him too.”

They knocked. There was no answer, so they tried the door. It was
bolted, but they thought they heard him moving within.

“Nicholas!” said Margaret. There was no answer, and they might have gone
away, believing the house to be empty, if there had not been some
accidental fall, as of a book, within.

“Nicholas!” said Margaret again. “It is only us. Won’t you let us come
in?”

“No,” said he. “I spoke as plain as I could, ’bout using words, when I
bolted th’ door. Let me be, this day.”

Mr. Hale would have urged their desire, but Margaret placed her finger
on his lips.

“I don’t wonder at it,” said she. “I myself long to be alone. It seems
the only thing to do one good after a day like this.”




CHAPTER XXXVII.

LOOKING SOUTH.

    “A spade! a rake! a hoe!
      A pickaxe or a bill!
    A hook to reap, or a scythe to mow,
      A flail or what ye will—
    And here’s a ready hand
      To ply the needful tool,
    And skill’d enough, by lessons rough,
      In Labour’s rugged school.”
              HOOD.


Higgins’s door was locked the next day, when they went to pay their call
on the widow Boucher: but they learnt this time from an officious
neighbour, that he was really from home. He had, however, been in to see
Mrs. Boucher, before starting on his day’s business, whatever that was.
It was but an unsatisfactory visit to Mrs. Boucher; she considered
herself an ill-used woman by her poor husband’s suicide; and there was
quite germ of truth enough in this idea to make it a very difficult one
to refute. Still, it was unsatisfactory to see how completely her
thoughts were turned upon herself and her own position, and this
selfishness extended even to her relations with her children, whom she
considered as incumbrances, even in the very midst of her somewhat
animal affection for them. Margaret tried to make acquaintances with one
or two of them, while her father strove to raise the widow’s thoughts
into some higher channel than that of mere helpless querulousness. She
found that the children were truer and simpler mourners than the widow.
Daddy had been a kind daddy to them; each could tell, in their eager
stammering way, of some tenderness shown, some indulgence granted by the
lost father.

“Is yon thing upstairs really him? it doesna look like him. I’m feared
on it, and I never was feared o’ daddy.”

Margaret’s heart bled to hear that the mother, in her selfish
requirement of sympathy, had taken her children upstairs to see their
dead disfigured father. It was intermingling the coarseness of horror
with the profoundness of natural grief. She tried to turn their thoughts
in some other direction; on what they could do for mother; on what—for
this was a more efficacious way of putting it—what father would have
wished them to do. Margaret was more successful than Mr. Hale in her
efforts. The children seeing their little duties lie in action close
around them, began to try each one to do something that she suggested
towards redding up the slatternly room. But her father set too high a
standard, and too abstract a view, before the indolent invalid. She
could not rouse her torpid mind into any vivid imagination of what her
husband’s misery might have been, before he had resorted to the last
terrible step; she could only look upon it as it affected herself; she
could not enter into the enduring mercy of the God who had not
specially interposed to prevent the water from drowning her prostrate
husband; and although she was secretly blaming her husband for having
fallen into such drear despair, and denying that he had any excuse for
his last rash act, she was inveterate in her abuse of all who could by
any possibility be supposed to have driven him to such desperation. The
masters—Mr. Thornton in particular, whose mill had been attacked by
Boucher, and who, after the warrant had been issued for his apprehension
on the charge of rioting, had caused it to be withdrawn,—the Union, of
which Higgins was a representative to the poor woman,—the children so
numerous, so hungry, and so noisy—all made up one great army of
personal enemies, whose fault it was that she was now a helpless widow.

Margaret heard enough of this unreasonableness to dishearten her; and
when they came away she found it impossible to cheer her father.

“It is the town life,” said she. “Their nerves are quickened by the
haste and bustle and speed of everything around them, to say nothing of
the confinement in these pent-up houses, which of itself is enough to
induce depression and worry of spirits. Now in the country, people live
so much more out of doors, even children, and even in the winter.”

“But people must live in towns. And in the country some get such
stagnant habits of mind that they are almost fatalists.”

“Yes; I acknowledge that. I suppose each mode of life produces its own
trials and its own temptations. The dweller in towns must find it as
difficult to be patient, as the country-bred man must find it to be
active, and equal to unwonted emergencies. Both must find it hard to
realise a future of any kind; the one because the present is so living
and hurrying and close around him; the other because his life tempts him
to revel in the mere sense of animal existence, not knowing of, and
consequently not caring for any pungency of pleasure, for the attainment
of which he can plan, and deny himself and look forward.”

“And thus both the necessity for engrossment, and the stupid content in
the present, produce the same effects. But this poor Mrs. Boucher! how
little we can do for her.”

“And yet we dare not leave her without our efforts, although they may
seem so useless. Oh papa! it’s a hard world to live in!”

“So it is, my child. We feel it so just now, at any rate; but we have
been very happy, even in the midst of our sorrow. What a pleasure
Frederick’s visit was!”

“Yes, that it was,” said Margaret, brightly. “It was such a charming,
snatched, forbidden thing.” But she suddenly stopped speaking. She had
spoiled the remembrance of Frederick’s visit to herself by her own
cowardice. Of all faults the one she most despised in others was the
want of bravery; the meanness of heart which leads to untruth. And here
had she been guilty of it! Then came the thought of Mr. Thornton’s
cognisance of her falsehood. She wondered if she should have minded
detection half so much from any one else. She tried herself in
imagination with her Aunt Shaw and Edith; with her father; with Captain
and Mr. Lennox; with Frederick. The thought of the last knowing what she
had done, even in his own behalf, was the most painful, for the brother
and sister were in the first flush of their mutual regard and love; but
even any fall in Frederick’s opinion was as nothing to the shame, the
shrinking shame she felt at the thought of meeting Mr. Thornton again.
And yet she longed to see him, to get it over; to understand where she
stood in his opinion. Her cheeks burnt as she recollected how proudly
she had implied an objection to trade (in the early days of their
acquaintance), because it too often led to the deceit of passing off
inferior for superior goods, in the one branch; of assuming credit for
wealth and resources not possessed, in the other. She remembered Mr.
Thornton’s look of calm disdain, as in few words he gave her to
understand that, in the great scheme of commerce, all dishonourable ways
of acting were sure to prove injurious in the long run, and that,
testing such actions simply according to the poor standard of success,
there was folly and not wisdom in all such, and every kind of deceit in
trade, as well as in other things. She remembered—she, then strong in
her own untempted truth—asking him, if he did not think that buying in
the cheapest and selling in the dearest market proved some want of the
transparent justice which is so intimately connected with the idea of
truth: and she had used the word chivalric—and her father had corrected
her with the higher word, Christian; and so drawn the argument upon
himself, while she sate silent by with a slight feeling of contempt.

No more contempt for her!—no more talk about the chivalric!
Henceforward she must feel humiliated and disgraced in his sight. But
when should she see him? Her heart leaped up in apprehension at every
ring of the door-bell; and yet, when it fell down to calmness, she felt
strangely saddened and sick at heart at each disappointment. It was very
evident that her father expected to see him, and was surprised that he
did not come. The truth was, that there were points in their
conversation the other night on which they had no time then to enlarge;
but it had been understood that if possible on the succeeding
evening—if not then, at least the very first evening that Mr. Thornton
could command,—they should meet for further discussion. Mr. Hale had
looked forward to this meeting ever since they had parted. He had not
yet resumed the instruction to his pupils, which he had relinquished at
the commencement of his wife’s more serious illness, so he had fewer
occupations than usual; and the great interest of the last day or so
(Boucher’s suicide) had driven him back with more eagerness than ever
upon his speculations. He was restless all the evening. He kept saying,
“I quite expected to have seen Mr. Thornton. I think the messenger who
brought the book last night must have had some note, and forgot to
deliver it. Do you think there has been any message left to-day?”

“I will go and inquire, papa,” said Margaret, after the changes on these
sentences had been rung once or twice, “Stay, there’s a ring!” She sat
down instantly, and bent her head attentively over her work. She heard a
step on the stairs, but it was only one, and she knew it was Dixon’s.
She lifted up her head and sighed, and believed she felt glad.

“It’s that Higgins, sir. He wants to see you, or else Miss Hale. Or it
might be Miss Hale first, and then you, sir; for he’s in a strange kind
of way.”

“He had better come up here, Dixon; and then he can see us both, and
choose which he likes for his listener.”

“Oh! very well, sir. I’ve no wish to hear what he’s got to say, I’m
sure; only, if you could see his shoes, I’m sure you’d say the kitchen
was the fitter place.”

“He can wipe them, I suppose,” said Mr. Hale. So Dixon flung off, to bid
him walk up-stairs. She was a little mollified, however, when he looked
at his feet with a hesitating air; and then, sitting down on the bottom
stair, he took off the offending shoes, and without a word walked
up-stairs.

“Sarvant, sir!” said he, slicking his hair down when he came into the
room: “If hoo’l excuse me (looking at Margaret) for being i’ my
stockings; I’se been tramping a’ day, and streets is none o’ th’
cleanest.”

Margaret thought that fatigue might account for the change in his
manner, for he was unusually quiet and subdued; and he had evidently
some difficulty in saying what he came to say.

Mr. Hale’s ever-ready sympathy with anything of shyness or hesitation,
or want of self-possession, made him come to his aid.

“We shall have tea up directly, and then you’ll take a cup with us, Mr.
Higgins. I am sure you are tired, if you’ve been out much this wet
relaxing day. Margaret, my dear, can’t you hasten tea?”

Margaret could only hasten tea by taking the preparation of it into her
own hands, and so offending Dixon, who was emerging out of her sorrow
for her late mistress into a very touchy, irritable state. But Martha,
like all who came in contact with Margaret—even Dixon herself, in the
long run—felt it a pleasure and an honour to forward any of her wishes;
and her readiness, and Margaret’s sweet forbearance, soon made Dixon
ashamed of herself.

“Why master and you must always be asking the lower classes up-stairs,
since we came to Milton, I cannot understand. Folk at Helstone were
never brought higher than the kitchen; and I’ve let one or two of them
know before now that they might think it an honour to be even there.”

Higgins found it easier to unburden himself to one than to two. After
Margaret left the room, he went to the door and assured himself that it
was shut. Then he came and stood close to Mr. Hale.

“Master,” said he, “yo’d not guess easy what I’ve been tramping after
to-day. Special if yo’d remember my manner o’ talk yesterday. I’ve been
a seeking work. I have,” said he. “I said to mysel’, I’d keep a civil
tongue in my head, let who would say what ’em would. I’d set my teeth
into my tongue sooner nor speak i’ haste. For that man’s sake—yo’
understand,” jerking his thumb back in some unknown direction.

“No, I don’t,” said Mr. Hale, seeing he waited for some kind of assent,
and completely bewildered as to who “that man” could be.

“That chap as lies theer,” said he, with another jerk. “Him as went and
drownded himself, poor chap! I did na think he’d got it in him to lie
still and let the water creep o’er him till he died. Boucher, yo’ know.”

“Yes, I know now,” said Mr. Hale. “Go back to what you were saying:
you’d not speak in haste——”

“For his sake. Yet not for his sake; for where’er he is, and whate’er,
he’ll ne’er know other clemming or cold again; but for the wife’s sake,
and the bits o’ childer.”

“God bless you!” said Mr. Hale, starting up; then, calming down, he
said, breathlessly, “What do you mean? Tell me out.”

“I have telled yo’,” said Higgins, a little surprised at Mr. Hale’s
agitation. “I would na ask for work for mysel’; but them’s left as a
charge on me. I reckon, I would ha guided Boucher to a better end; but I
set him off o’ th’ road, and so I mun answer for him.”

Mr. Hale got hold of Higgins’s hand and shook it heartily, without
speaking. Higgins looked awkward and ashamed.

“Theer, theer, master! Theer’s ne’er a man, to call a man, amongst us,
but what would do th’ same; ay, and better too; for, belie’ me, Is’e
ne’er got a stroke o’ work, nor yet a sight of any. For all I telled
Hamper that, let alone his pledge—which I would not sign—no, I could
na, not e’en for this—he’d ne’er ha’ such a worker on his mill as I
would be—he’d ha’ none o’ me—no more would none o’ th’ others. I’m a
poor black feckless sheep—childer may clem for ought I can do, unless,
parson, yo’d help me?”

“Help you! How? I would do anything,—but what can I do?”

“Miss there”—for Margaret had re-entered the room, and stood silent,
listening—“has often talked grand o’ the South, and the ways down
there. Now I dunnot know how far off it is, but I been thinking if I
could get ’em down theer, where food is cheap and wages good, and all
the folk, rich and poor, master and man, friendly like; yo’ could, may
be, help me to work. I’m not forty-five, and I’ve a deal o’ strength in
me, measter.”

“But what kind of work could you do, my man?”

“Well, I reckon I could spade a bit——”

“And for that,” said Margaret, stepping forwards, “for anything you
could do, Higgins, with the best will in the world, you would, may be,
get nine shillings a week; may be ten, at the outside. Food is much the
same as here, except that you might have a little garden——”

“The childer could work at that,” said he. “I’m sick o’ Milton anyways,
and Milton is sick o’ me.”

“You must not go the South,” said Margaret, “for all that. You could not
stand it. You would have to be out all weathers. It would kill you with
rheumatism. The mere bodily work at your time of life would break you
down. The fare is far different to what you have been accustomed to.”

“I’se nought particular about my meat,” said he, as if offended.

“But you’ve reckoned on having butcher’s meat once a day, if you’re in
work; pay for that out of your ten shillings, and keep those poor
children if you can. I owe it to you—since it’s my way of talking that
has set you off on this idea—to put it all clear before you. You would
not bear the dulness of the life; you don’t know what it is; it would
eat you away like rust. Those that have lived there all their lives, are
used to soaking in the stagnant waters. They labour on from day to day,
in the great solitude of steaming fields—never speaking or lifting up
their poor, bent, downcast heads. The hard spadework robs their brain of
life; the sameness of their toil deadens their imagination; they don’t
care to meet to talk over thoughts and speculations, even of the
weakest, wildest kind, after their work is done; they go home brutishly
tired, poor creatures! caring for nothing but food and rest. You could
not stir them up into any companionship, which you get in a town as
plentiful as the air you breathe, whether it be good or bad—and that I
don’t know; but I do know, that you of all men are not one to bear a
life among such labourers. What would be peace to them, would be eternal
fretting to you. Think no more of it, Nicholas, I beg. Besides, you
could never pay to get mother and children all there—that’s one good
thing.”

“I’ve reckoned for that. One house mun do for us a’, and the furniture
o’ t’other would go a good way. And men theer mun have their families to
keep—m’appen six or seven childer. God help ’em!” said he, more
convinced by his own presentation of the facts than by all Margaret had
said, and suddenly renouncing the idea, which had but recently formed
itself in a brain worn out by the day’s fatigue and anxiety. “God help
’em! North an’ South have each getten their own troubles. If work’s sure
and steady theer, labour’s paid at starvation wages; while here we’n
rucks o’ money coming in one quarter, and ne’er a farthing th’ next. For
sure, th’ world is in a confusion that passes me or any other man to
understand; it needs fettling, and who’s to fettle it if it’s as yon
folks say, and there’s nought but what we see?”

Mr. Hale was busy cutting bread and butter; Margaret was glad of this,
for she saw that Higgins was better left to himself: that if her father
began to speak ever so mildly on the subject of Higgins’s thoughts, the
latter would consider himself challenged to an argument, and would feel
himself bound to maintain his own ground. She and her father kept up an
indifferent conversation until Higgins, scarcely aware whether he ate or
not, had made a very substantial meal. Then he pushed his chair away
from the table, and tried to take an interest in what they were saying;
but it was of no use; and he fell back into dreamy gloom. Suddenly,
Margaret said (she had been thinking of it for some time, but the words
had stuck in her throat), “Higgins have you been to Marlborough Mills to
seek for work?”

“Thornton’s?” asked he. “Ay, I’ve been at Thornton’s”

“And what did he say?”

“Such a chap as me is not like to see the measter. Th’ o’erlooker bid me
go and be d——d.”

“I wish you had seen Mr. Thornton,” said Mr. Hale. “He might not have
given you work, but he would not have used such language.”

“As to th’ language, I’m welly used to it; it dunnot matter to me. I’m
not nesh mysel’ when I’m put out. It were th’ fact that I were na wanted
theer, no more nor ony other place, as I minded.”

“But I wish you had seen Mr. Thornton,” repeated Margaret. “Would you go
again—it’s a good deal to ask, I know—but would you go to-morrow and
try him? I should be so glad if you would.”

“I’m afraid it would be of no use,” said Mr. Hale, in a low voice. “It
would be better to let me speak to him.” Margaret still looked at
Higgins for his answer. Those grave soft eyes of hers were difficult to
resist. He gave a great sigh.

“It would tax my pride above a bit; if it were for mysel’, I could stand
a deal o’ clemming first; I’d sooner knock him down than ask a favour
from him. I’d a deal sooner be flogged mysel’; but yo’re not a common
wench, axing yo’r pardon, nor yet have yo’ common ways about yo’. I’ll
e’en make a wry face, and go at it to-morrow. Dunna yo’ think that he’ll
do it. That man has it in him to be burnt at the stake afore he’ll give
in. I’ll do it for yo’r sake, Miss Hale, and it’s first time in my life
as e’er I give way to a woman. Neither my wife nor Bess could e’er say
that much again me.”

“All the more do I thank you,” said Margaret, smiling. “Though I don’t
believe you: I believe you have just given way to wife and daughter as
much as most men.”

“And as to Mr. Thornton,” said Mr. Hale, “I’ll give you a note to him,
which, I think I may venture say, will ensure you a hearing.”

“I thank yo’ kindly, sir, but I’d as lief stand on my own bottom. I
dunnot stomach the notion of having favour curried for me, by one as
doesn’t know the ins and outs of the quarrel. Meddling ’twixt master and
man is liker meddling ’twixt husband and wife than aught else: it takes
a deal of wisdom to do ony good. I’ll stand guard at the lodge door.
I’ll stand there fro’ six in the morning till I get speech on him. But
I’d liefer sweep th’ streets, if paupers had na’ got hold on that work.
Dunna yo’ hope, miss. There’ll be more chance o’ getting milk out of a
flint. I wish yo’ a very good night, and many thanks to yo’.”

“You’ll find your shoes by the kitchen fire; I took them there to dry,”
said Margaret.

He turned round and looked at her steadily, and then he brushed his lean
hand across his eyes and went his way.

“How proud that man is!” said her father, who was a little annoyed at
the manner in which Higgins had declined his intercession with Mr.
Thornton.

“He is,” said Margaret; “but what grand makings of a man there are in
him, pride and all.”

“It’s amusing to see how he evidently respects the part in Mr.
Thornton’s character which is like his own.”

“There’s granite in all these northern people, papa, is there not?”

“There was none in poor Boucher, I am afraid; none in his wife either.”

“I should guess by their tones that they had Irish blood in them. I
wonder what success he’ll have to-morrow. If he and Mr. Thornton would
speak out together as man to man—if Higgins would forget that Mr.
Thornton was a master, and speak to him as he does to us—and if Mr.
Thornton would be patient enough to listen to him with his human heart,
not with his master’s ears—”

“You are getting to do Mr. Thornton justice at last, Margaret,” said her
father, pinching her ear.

Margaret had a strange choking at her heart, which made her unable to
answer, “Oh!” thought she, “I wish I were a man, that I could go and
force him to express his disapprobation, and tell him honestly that I
knew I deserved it. It seems hard to lose him as a friend just when I
had begun to feel his value. How tender he was with dear mamma! If it
were only for her sake, I wish he would come, and then at least I should
know how much I was abased in his eyes.”




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

PROMISES FULFILLED.

    “Then proudly, proudly up she rose,
       Tho’ the tear was in her e’e,
     Whate’er ye say, think what ye may,
       Ye’s get na word frae me!”
                   SCOTCH BALLAD.


It was not merely that Margaret was known to Mr. Thornton to have spoken
falsely,—though she imagined that for this reason only was she so
turned in his opinion,—but that this falsehood of hers bore a distinct
reference in his mind to some other lover. He could not forget the fond
and earnest look that had passed between her and some other man—the
attitude of familiar confidence, if not of positive endearment. The
thought of this perpetually stung him; it was a picture before his
eyes, wherever he went and whatever he was doing. In addition to this
(and he ground his teeth as he remembered it), was the hour, dusky
twilight; the place, so far away from home, and comparatively
unfrequented. His nobler self had said at first, that all this last
might be accidental, innocent, justifiable; but once allow her right to
love and be beloved (and had he any reason to deny her right?—had not
her words been severely explicit when she cast his love away from her?),
she might easily have been beguiled into a longer walk, on to a later
hour than she had anticipated. But that falsehood! which showed a fatal
consciousness of something wrong, and to be concealed, which was unlike
her. He did her that justice, though all the time it would have been a
relief to believe her utterly unworthy of his esteem. It was this that
made the misery—that he passionately loved her, and thought her, even
with all her faults, more lovely and more excellent than any other
woman; yet he deemed her so attached to some other man, so led away by
her affection for him, as to violate her truthful nature. The very
falsehood that stained her, was a proof how blindly she loved
another—this dark, slight, elegant, handsome man—while he himself was
rough, and stern, and strongly made. He lashed himself into an agony of
fierce jealousy. He thought of that look, that attitude!—how he would
have laid his life at her feet for such tender glances, such fond
detention! He mocked at himself, for having valued the mechanical way in
which she had protected him from the fury of the mob; now he had seen
how soft and bewitching she looked when with a man she really loved. He
remembered, point by point, the sharpness of her words—“There was not a
man in all that crowd for whom she would not have done as much, far more
readily than for him.” He shared with the mob, in her desire of averting
bloodshed from them; but this man, this hidden lover, shared with
nobody; he had looks, words, hand-cleavings, lies, concealment, all to
himself.

Mr. Thornton was conscious that he had never been so irritable as he was
now, in all his life long; he felt inclined to give a short abrupt
answer, more like a bark than a speech, to every one that asked him a
question; and this consciousness hurt his pride: he had always piqued
himself on his self-control, and control himself he would. So the manner
was subdued to a quiet deliberation, but the matter was even harder and
sterner than common. He was more than usually silent at home; employing
his evenings in a continual pace backwards and forwards, which would
have annoyed his mother exceedingly if it had been practised by any one
else; and did not tend to promote any forbearance on her part even to
this beloved son.

“Can you stop—can you sit down for a moment? I have something to say to
you, if you would give up that everlasting walk, walk, walk.”

He sat down instantly, on a chair against the wall.

“I want to speak to you about Betsy. She says she must leave us; that
her lover’s death has so affected her spirits she can’t give her heart
to her work.”

“Very well. I suppose other cooks are to be met with.”

“That’s so like a man. It’s not merely the cooking, it is that she knows
all the ways of the house. Besides, she tells me something about your
friend Miss Hale.”

“Miss Hale is no friend of mine. Mr. Hale is my friend.”

“I am glad to hear you say so, for if she had been your friend, what
Betsy says would have annoyed you.”

“Let me hear it,” said he, with the extreme quietness of manner he had
been assuming for the last few days.

“Betsy says, that the night on which her lover—I forget his name—for
she always calls him ‘he’——”

“Leonards.”

“The night on which Leonards was last seen at the station—when he was
last seen on duty, in fact—Miss Hale was there, walking about with a
young man who, Bessy believes, killed Leonards by some blow or push.”

“Leonards was not killed by any blow or push.”

“How do you know?”

“Because I distinctly put the question to the surgeon of the Infirmary.
He told me there was an internal disease of long standing, caused by
Leonards’ habit of drinking to excess; that the fact of his becoming
rapidly worse while in a state of intoxication, settled the question as
to whether the last fatal attack was caused by excess of drinking, or
the fall.”

“The fall! What fall?”

“Caused by the blow or push of which Betsy speaks.”

“Then there was a blow or push?”

“I believe so.”

“And who did it?”

“As there was no inquest, in consequence of the doctor’s opinion, I
cannot tell you.”

“But Miss Hale was there?”

No answer.

“And with a young man?”

Still no answer. At last he said: “I tell you, mother, that there was no
inquest—no inquiry. No judicial inquiry, I mean.”

“Betsy says that Woolmer (some man she knows, who is in a grocer’s shop
out at Crampton) can swear that Miss Hale was at the station at that
hour, walking backwards and forwards with a young man.”

“I don’t see what we have to do with that. Miss Hale is at liberty to
please herself.”

“I’m glad to hear you say so,” says Mrs. Thornton, eagerly. “It
certainly signifies very little to us—not at all to you, after what has
passed! but I—I made a promise to Mrs. Hale, that I would not allow her
daughter to go wrong without advising and remonstrating with her. I
shall certainly let her know my opinion of such conduct.”

“I do not see any harm in what she did that evening,” said Mr.
Thornton, getting up, and coming near to his mother; he stood by the
chimney-piece with his face turned away from the room.

“You would not have approved of Fanny’s being seen out, after dark, in
rather a lonely place, walking about with a young man. I say nothing of
the taste which could choose the time, when her mother lay unburied, for
such a promenade. Should you have liked your sister to have been noticed
by a grocer’s assistant for doing so?”

“In the first place, as it is not many years since I myself was a
draper’s assistant, the mere circumstance of a grocer’s assistant
noticing any act does not alter the character of the act to me. And in
the next place, I see a great deal of difference between Miss Hale and
Fanny. I can imagine that the one may have weighty reasons, which may
and ought to make her overlook any seeming impropriety in her conduct. I
never knew Fanny have weighty reasons for anything. Other people must
guard her. I believe Miss Hale is a guardian to herself.”

“A pretty character of your sister, indeed! Really, John, one would have
thought Miss Hale had done enough to make you clear-sighted. She drew
you on to an offer, by a bold display of pretended regard for you,—to
play you off against this very young man, I’ve no doubt. Her whole
conduct is clear to me now. You believe he is her lover, I suppose—you
agree to that.”

He turned round to his mother; his face was very gray and grim. “Yes,
mother. I do believe he is her lover.” When he had spoken, he turned
round again; he writhed himself about, like one in bodily pain. He leant
his face against his hand. Then before she could speak, he turned sharp
again:

“Mother. He is her lover, whoever he is; but she may need help and
womanly counsel;—there may be difficulties or temptations which I don’t
know. I fear there are. I don’t want to know what they are; but as you
have ever been a good—ay! and a tender mother to me, go to her, and
gain her confidence, and tell her what is best to be done. I know that
something is wrong; some dread, which must be a terrible torture to
her.”

“For God’s sake, John!” said his mother, now really shocked, “what do
you mean? What do you mean? What do you know?”

He did not reply to her.

“John! I don’t know what I shan’t think unless you speak. You have no
right to say what you have done against her.”

“Not against her, mother! I _could_ not speak against her.”

“Well! you have no right to say what you have done, unless you say more.
These half-expressions are what ruin a woman’s character.”

“Her character! Mother, you do not dare—” he faced about, and looked
into her face with his flaming eyes. Then, drawing himself up into
determined composure and dignity, he said, “I will not say any more than
this, which is neither more nor less than the simple truth, and I am
sure you believe me,—I have good reason to believe, that Miss Hale is
in some strait and difficulty connected with an attachment which, of
itself, from my knowledge of Miss Hale’s character, is perfectly
innocent and right. What my reason is, I refuse to tell. But never let
me hear any one say a word against her, implying any more serious
imputation than that she now needs the counsel of some kind and gentle
woman. You promised Mrs. Hale to be that woman!”

“No!” said Mrs. Thornton. “I am happy to say, I did not promise kindness
and gentleness, for I felt at the time that it might be out of my power
to render these to one of Miss Hale’s character and disposition. I
promised counsel and advice, such as I would give to my own daughter; I
shall speak to her as I would do to Fanny, if she had gone gallivanting
with a young man in the dusk. I shall speak with relation to the
circumstances I know, without being influenced either one way or another
by the ‘strong reasons’ which you will not confide to me. Then I shall
have fulfilled my promise, and done my duty.

“She will never bear it,” said he passionately.

“She will have to bear it, if I speak in her dead mother’s name.”

“Well!” said he, breaking away, “don’t tell me any more about it. I
cannot endure to think of it. It will be better that you should speak to
her any way, than that she should not be spoken to at all.—Oh! that
look of love!” continued he, between his teeth, as he bolted himself
into his own private room. “And that cursed lie; which showed some
terrible shame in the background, to be kept from the light in which I
thought she lived perpetually! Oh, Margaret, Margaret! Mother, how you
have tortured me! Oh! Margaret, could you not have loved me? I am but
uncouth and hard, but I would never have led you into any falsehood for
me.”

The more Mrs. Thornton thought over what her son had said, in pleading
for a merciful judgment for Margaret’s indiscretion, the more bitterly
she felt inclined towards her. She took a savage pleasure in the idea of
“speaking her mind” to her, in the guise of fulfilment of a duty. She
enjoyed the thought of showing herself untouched by the “glamour,” which
she was well aware Margaret had the power of throwing over many people.
She snorted scornfully over the picture of the beauty of her victim; her
jet black hair, her clear smooth skin, her lucid eyes would not help to
save her one word of the just and stern reproach which Mrs. Thornton
spent half the night in preparing to her mind.

“Is Miss Hale within?” She knew she was, for she had seen her at the
window, and she had her feet inside the little hall before Martha had
half answered the question.

Margaret was sitting alone, writing to Edith, and giving her many
particulars of her mother’s last days. It was a softening employment,
and she had to brush away the unbidden tears as Mrs. Thornton was
announced.

She was so gentle and ladylike in her mode of reception that her visitor
was somewhat daunted; and it became impossible to utter the speech, so
easy of arrangement with no one to address it to. Margaret’s low rich
voice was softer than usual; her manner more gracious, because in her
heart she was feeling very grateful to Mrs. Thornton for the courteous
attention of her call. She exerted herself to find subjects of interest
for conversation; praised Martha, the servant whom Mrs. Thornton had
found for them: had asked Edith for a little Greek air, about which she
had spoken to Miss Thornton. Mrs. Thornton was fairly discomfited. Her
sharp Damascus blade seemed out of place, and useless among rose-leaves.
She was silent because she was trying to task herself up to her duty. At
last she stung herself into its performance by a suspicion which, in
spite of all probability, she allowed to cross her mind, that all this
sweetness was put on with a view of propitiating Mr. Thornton; that,
somehow, the other attachment had fallen through, and that it suited
Miss Hale’s purpose to recall her rejected lover. Poor Margaret! there
was perhaps so much truth in the suspicion as this; that Mrs. Thornton
was the mother of one whose regard she valued, and feared to have lost;
and this thought unconsciously added to her natural desire of pleasing
one who was showing her kindness by her visit. Mrs. Thornton stood up to
go, but yet she seemed to have something more to say. She cleared her
throat and began:

“Miss Hale, I have a duty to perform. I promised your poor mother that,
as far as my poor judgment went, I would not allow you to act in any way
wrongly, or (she softened her speech down a little here) inadvertently,
without remonstrating; at least without offering advice, whether you
took it or not.”

Margaret stood before her, blushing like any culprit, with her eyes
dilating as she gazed at Mrs. Thornton. She thought she had come to
speak to her about the falsehood she had told—that Mr. Thornton had
employed her to explain the danger she had exposed herself to, of being
confuted in full court! and although her heart sank to think he had not
rather chosen to come himself, and upbraid her, and receive her
penitence, and restore her again to his good opinion, yet she was too
much humbled not to bear any blame on this subject patiently and meekly.

Mrs. Thornton went on:

“At first, when I heard from one of my servants, that you had been seen
walking about with a gentleman, so far from home as the Outwood station,
at such a time of the evening, I could hardly believe it. But my son, I
am sorry to say, confirmed her story. It was indiscreet, to say the
least; many a young woman has lost her character before now——”

Margaret’s eyes flashed fire. This was a new idea—this was too
insulting. If Mrs. Thornton had spoken to her about the lie she had
told, well and good—she would have owned it, and humiliated herself.
But to interfere with her conduct—to speak of her character! she—Mrs.
Thornton, a mere stranger—it was too impertinent! She would not answer
her—not one word. Mrs. Thornton saw the battle-spirit in Margaret’s
eyes, and it called up her combativeness also.

“For your mother’s sake, I have thought it right to warn you against
such improprieties; they must degrade you in the long run in the
estimation of the world, even if in fact they do not lead you to
positive harm.”

“For my mother’s sake,” said Margaret, in a tearful voice, “I will bear
much; but I cannot bear everything. She never meant me to be exposed to
insult, I am sure.”

“Insult, Miss Hale!”

“Yes, madam,” said Margaret more steadily, “it is insult. What do you
know of me that should lead you to suspect—Oh!” said she, breaking
down, and covering her face with her hands—“I know now, Mr. Thornton
has told you——”

“No, Miss Hale,” said Mrs. Thornton, her truthfulness causing her to
arrest the confession Margaret was on the point of making, though her
curiosity was itching to hear it. “Stop. Mr. Thornton has told me
nothing. You do not know my son. You are not worthy to know him. He said
this. Listen, young lady, that you may understand, if you can, what sort
of a man you rejected. This Milton manufacturer, his great tender heart
scorned as it was scorned, said to me only last night, ‘Go to her. I
have good reason to know that she is in some strait arising out of some
attachment; and she needs womanly counsel.’ I believe those were his
very words. Farther than that—beyond admitting the fact of your being
at the Outwood station with a gentleman, on the evening of the
twenty-sixth—he has said nothing—not one word against you. If he has
knowledge of anything which should make you sob so, he keeps it to
himself.”

Margaret’s face was still hidden in her hands, the fingers of which were
wet with tears. Mrs. Thornton was a little mollified.

“Come, Miss Hale. There may be circumstances, I’ll allow, that, if
explained, may take off from the seeming impropriety.”

Still no answer. Margaret was considering what to say; she wished to
stand well with Mrs. Thornton; and yet she could not, might not, give
any explanation. Mrs. Thornton grew impatient.

“I shall be sorry to break off an acquaintance; but for Fanny’s sake—as
I told my son, if Fanny had done so we should consider it a great
disgrace—and Fanny might be led away——”

“I can give you no explanation,” said Margaret, in a low voice. “I have
done wrong, but not in the way you think or know about. I think Mr.
Thornton judges me more mercifully than you;”—she had hard work to keep
herself from choking with her tears—“but, I believe, madam, you mean to
do rightly.”

“Thank you,” said Mrs. Thornton, drawing herself up; “I was not aware
that my meaning was doubted. It is the last time I shall interfere. I
was unwilling to consent to do it, when your mother asked me. I had not
approved of my son’s attachment to you, while I only suspected it. You
did not appear to me worthy of him. But when you compromised yourself as
you did at the time of the riot, and exposed yourself to the comments of
servants and workpeople, I felt it was no longer right to set myself
against my son’s wish of proposing to you—a wish, by the way, which he
had always denied entertaining until the day of the riot.” Margaret
winced, and drew in her breath with a long, hissing sound; of which,
however, Mrs. Thornton took no notice. “He came; you had apparently
changed your mind. I told my son yesterday, that I thought it possible,
short as was the interval, you might have heard or learnt something of
this other lover——”

“What must you think of me, madam?” asked Margaret, throwing her head
back with proud disdain, till her throat curved outwards like a swan’s.
“You can say nothing more, Mrs. Thornton. I decline every attempt to
justify myself for anything. You must allow me to leave the room.”

And she swept out of it with the noiseless grace of an offended
princess. Mrs. Thornton had quite enough of natural humour to make her
feel the ludricrousness of the position in which she was left. There was
nothing for it but to show herself out. She was not particularly annoyed
at Margaret’s way of behaving. She did not care enough for her for that.
She had taken Mrs. Thornton’s remonstrance to the full as keenly to
heart as that lady expected; and Margaret’s passion at once mollified
her visitor, far more than any silence or reserve could have done. It
showed the effect of her words. “My young lady,” thought Mrs. Thornton
to herself; “you’ve a pretty good temper of your own. If John and you
had come together, he would have had to keep a tight hand over you, to
make you know your place. But I don’t think you will go a-walking again
with your beau, at such an hour of the day, in a hurry. You’ve too much
pride and spirit in you for that. I like to see a girl fly out at the
notion of being talked about. It shows they’re neither giddy, nor bold
by nature. As for that girl, she might be bold, but she’d never be
giddy. I’ll do her that justice. Now as to Fanny, she’d be giddy, and
not bold. She’s no courage in her, poor thing!”

Mr. Thornton was not spending the morning so satisfactorily as his
mother. She, at any rate, was fulfilling her determined purpose. He was
trying to understand where he stood; what damage the strike had done
him. A good deal of his capital was locked up in new and expensive
machinery; and he had also bought cotton largely, with a view to some
great orders which he had in hand. The strike had thrown him terribly
behindhand, as to the completion of these orders. Even with his own
accustomed and skilled workpeople, he would have had some difficulty in
fulfilling his engagements; as it was, the incompetence of the Irish
hands, who had to be trained to their work, at a time requiring unusual
activity, was a daily annoyance.

It was not a favourable hour for Higgins to make his request. But he had
promised Margaret to do it at any cost. So, though every moment added to
his repugnance, his pride, and his sullenness of temper, he stood
leaning against the dead wall, hour after hour, first on one leg, then
on the other. At last the latch was sharply lifted, and out came Mr.
Thornton.

“I want for to speak to yo’, sir.”

“Can’t stay now, my man. I’m too late as it is.”

“Well, sir, I reckon I can wait till yo’ come back.”

Mr. Thornton was half way down the street. Higgins sighed. But it was no
use. To catch him in the street, was his only chance of seeing “the
measter!” if he had rung the lodge bell or even gone up to the house to
ask for him, he would have been referred to the overlooker. So he stood
still again, vouchsafing no answer, but a short nod of recognition to
the few men who knew and spoke to him, as the crowd drove out the
millyard at dinner-time, and scowling with all his might at the Irish
“knobsticks” who had just been imported. At last Mr. Thornton returned.

“What! you there still!”

“Ay, sir, I mun speak to yo’.”

“Come in here, then. Stay, we’ll go across the yard; the men are not
come back, and we shall have it to ourselves. These good people, I see,
are at dinner,” said he, closing the door of the porter’s lodge.

He stopped to speak to the overlooker. The latter said in a low tone:

“I suppose you know, sir, that that man is Higgins, one of the leaders
of the Union; he that made that speech in Hurstfield.”

“No, I didn’t,” said Mr. Thornton, looking round sharply at his
follower. Higgins was known to him by name as a turbulent spirit.

“Come along,” said he, and his tone was rougher than before. “It is men
such as this,” thought he, “who interrupt commerce and injure the very
town they live in: mere demagogues, lovers of power at whatever cost to
others.”

“Well, sir! what do you want with me?” said Mr. Thornton, facing round
at him, as soon as they were in the counting-house of the mill.

“My name is Higgins”——

“I know that,” broke in Mr. Thornton. “What do you want, Mr. Higgins?
That’s the question.”

“I want work.”

“Work! You’re a pretty chap to come asking me for work. You don’t want
impudence, that’s very clear.”

“I’ve getten enemies and backbiters, like my betters; but I ne’er heerd
o’ ony of them calling me o’er-modest,” said Higgins. His blood was a
little roused by Mr. Thornton’s manner, more than by his words.

Mr. Thornton saw a letter addressed to himself on the table. He took it
up and read it through. At the end, he looked up and said, “What are you
waiting for?”

“An answer to th’ question I axed.”

“I gave it you before. Don’t waste any more of your time.”

“Yo’ made a remark, sir, on my impudence: but I were taught that it was
manners to say either ‘yes’ or ‘no,’ when I were axed a civil question.
I should be thankfu’ to yo’ if yo’d give me work. Hamper will speak to
my being a good hand.”

“I’ve a notion you’d better not send me to Hamper to ask for a
character, my man. I might hear more than you’d like.”

“I’d take th’ risk. Worst they could say of me is, that I did what I
thought best, even to my own wrong.”

“You’d better go and try them, then, and see whether they’ll give you
work. I’ve turned off upwards of a hundred of my best hands, for no
other fault than following you and such as you; and d’ye think I’ll take
you on? I might as well put a fire-brand into the midst of the
cotton-waste.”

Higgins turned away: then the recollection of Boucher came over him, and
he faced round with the greatest concession he could persuade himself to
make.

“I’d promise yo’, measter, I’d not speak a word as could do harm, if so
be yo’ did right by us; and I’d promise more: I’d promise that when I
seed yo’ going wrong, and acting unfair, I’d speak to yo’ in private
first; and that would be a fair warning. If yo’ and I did na agree in
our opinion o’ your conduct, yo’ might turn me off at an hour’s notice.”

“Upon my word, you don’t think small beer of yourself! Hamper has had a
loss of you. How came he to let you and your wisdom go?”

“Well, we parted wi’ mutual dissatisfaction. I wouldn’t gi’e the pledge
they were asking; and they wouldn’t have me at no rate. So I’m free to
make another engagement; and as I said before, though I should na’ say
it, I’m a good hand, measter, and a steady man—specially when I can
keep fro’ drink; and that I shall do now, if I ne’er did afore.”

“That you may have more money laid up for another strike, I suppose?”

“No! I’d be thankful if I was free to do that; it’s for to keep th’
widow and childer of a man who was drove mad by them knobsticks o’
yourn; put out of his place by a Paddy that did na know weft fro’ warp.”

“Well! you’d better turn to something else, if you’ve any such good
intention in your head. I shouldn’t advise you to stay in Milton: you’re
too well known here.”

“If it were summer,” said Higgins, “I’d take to Paddy’s work, and go as
a navvy, or haymaking, or summat, and ne’er see Milton again. But it’s
winter, and th’ childer will clem.”

“A pretty navvy you’d make! why you couldn’t do half a day’s work at
digging against an Irishman.”

“I’d only charge half-a-day for th’ twelve hours, if I could only do
half-a-day’s work in th’ time. Yo’re not knowing of any place, where
they could gi’ me a trial, away fro’ the mills, if I’m such a firebrand?
I’d take any wage they thought I was worth, for the sake of those
childer.”

“Don’t you see what you would be? You’d be a knobstick. You’d be taking
less wages than the other labourers—all for the sake of another man’s
children. Think how you’d abuse any poor fellow who was willing to take
what he could get to keep his own children. You and your Union would
soon be down upon him. No! no! if it’s only for the recollection of the
way in which you’ve used the poor knobsticks before now, I say No! to
your question. I’ll not give you work. I won’t say, I don’t believe your
pretext for coming and asking for work; I know nothing about it. It may
be true, or it may not. It’s a very unlikely story, at any rate. Let me
pass. I’ll not give you work. There’s your answer.”

“I hear, sir. I would na ha’ troubled you’, but that I were bid to come,
by one as seemed to think yo’d getten some place in your heart. Hoo were
mistook, and I were misled. But I’m not the first man as is misled by a
woman.”

“Tell her to mind her own business the next time, instead of taking up
your time and mine too. I believe women are at the bottom of every
plague in this world. Be off with you.”

“I’m obleeged to you for a’ yo’r kindness, measter, and most of a’ for
yo’r civil way o’ saying good-bye.”

Mr. Thornton did not deign a reply. But, looking out of the window a
minute later, he was struck with the lean, bent figure going out of the
yard; the heavy walk was in strange contrast with the resolute, clear
determination of the man to speak to him. He crossed to the porter’s
lodge:

“How long has that man Higgins been waiting to speak to me?”

“He was outside the gate before eight o’clock, sir. I think he’s been
there ever since.”

“And it is now—?”

“Just one, sir.”

“Five hours,” thought Mr. Thornton; “it’s a long time for a man to wait,
doing nothing but first hoping and then fearing.”




CHAPTER XXXIX.

MAKING FRIENDS.

    “Nay, I have done; you get no more of me;
    And I am glad, yea glad with all my heart,
    That thus so clearly I myself am free.”
              DRAYTON.


Margaret shut herself up in her own room, after she had quitted Mrs.
Thornton. She began to walk backwards and forwards, in her old habitual
way of showing agitation; but, then, remembering that in that
slightly-built house every step was heard from one room to another, she
sate down until she heard Mrs. Thornton go safely out of the house. She
forced herself to recollect all the conversation that had passed between
them; speech by speech, she compelled her memory to go through with it.
At the end, she rose up, and said to herself, in a melancholy tone:

“At any rate, her words do not touch me; they fall off from me; for I am
innocent of all the motives she attributes to me. But still, it is hard
to think that any one—any woman—can believe all this of another so
easily. It is hard and sad. Where I have done wrong, she does not accuse
me—she does not know. He never told her: I might have known he would
not!”

She lifted up her head, as if she took pride in any delicacy of feeling
which Mr. Thornton had shown. Then, as a new thought came across her,
she pressed her hands tightly together:

“He, too, must take poor Frederick for some lover.” (She blushed as the
word passed through her mind.) “I see it now. It is not merely that he
knows of my falsehood, but he believes that some one else cares for me;
and that I—— Oh dear!—oh dear! What shall I do? What do I mean? Why
do I care what he thinks, beyond the mere loss of his good opinion as
regards my telling the truth or not? I cannot tell. But I am very
miserable! Oh, how unhappy this last year has been! I have passed out of
childhood into old age. I have had no youth—no womanhood; the hopes of
womanhood have closed for me—for I shall never marry; and I anticipate
cares and sorrows just as if I were an old woman, and with the same
tearful spirit. I am weary of this continual call upon me for strength.
I could bear up for papa; because that is a natural, pious duty. And I
think I could bear up against—at any rate, I could have the energy to
resent, Mrs. Thornton’s unjust, impertinent suspicions. But it is hard
to feel how completely he must misunderstand me. What has happened to
make me so morbid to-day? I do not know. I only know I cannot help it. I
must give way sometimes. No, I will not though,” said she, springing to
her feet. “I will not—I _will_ not think of myself and my own position.
I won’t examine into my own feelings. It would be of no use now. Some
time, if I live to be an old woman, I may sit over the fire, and looking
into the embers, see the life that might have been.”

All this time she was hastily putting on her things to go out, only
stopping from time to time to wipe her eyes, with an impatience of
gesture at the tears that would come again, in spite of all her bravery.

“I dare say there’s many a woman makes as sad a mistake as I have done,
and only finds it out too late. And how proudly and impertinently I
spoke to him that day! But I did not know then. It has come upon me
little by little, and I don’t know where it began. Now I won’t give way.
I shall find it difficult to behave in the same way to him, with this
miserable consciousness upon me; but I will be very calm and very quiet,
and say very little. But, to be sure, I may not see him; he keeps out of
our way evidently. That would be worse than all. And yet no wonder that
he avoids me, believing what he must about me.”

She went out, going rapidly towards the country, and trying to drown
reflection by swiftness of motion.

As she stood on the door-step, at her return, her father came up:

“Good girl!” said he. “You’ve been to Mrs. Boucher’s. I was just meaning
to go there, if I had time, before dinner.”

“No, papa; I have not,” said Margaret, reddening. “I never thought
about her. But I will go directly after dinner; I will go while you are
taking your nap.”

Accordingly Margaret went. Mrs. Boucher was very ill; really ill—not
merely ailing. The kind and sensible neighbour, who had come in the
other day, seemed to have taken charge of everything. Some of the
children were gone to the neighbours. Mary Higgins had come for the
three youngest at dinner-time; and since then Nicholas had gone for the
doctor. He had not come as yet; Mrs. Boucher was dying; and there was
nothing to do but wait. Margaret thought that she should like to hear
his opinion, and that she could not do better than go and see the
Higginses in the meantime. She might then possibly hear whether Nicholas
had been able to make his application to Mr. Thornton.

She found Nicholas busily engaged in making a penny spin on the dresser,
for the amusement of three little children, who were clinging to him in
a fearless manner. He, as well as they, was smiling at a good long spin;
and Margaret thought, that the happy look of interest in his occupation
was a good sign. When the penny stopped spinning, “lile Johnnie” began
to cry.

“Come to me,” said Margaret, taking him off the dresser, and holding him
in her arms; she held her watch to his ear, while she asked Nicholas if
he had seen Mr. Thornton.

The look on his face changed instantly.

“Ay!” said he. “I’ve seen and heerd too much on him.”

“He refused you, then?” said Margaret, sorrowfully.

“To be sure. I knew he’d do it all along. It’s no good expecting marcy
at the hands o’ them measters. Yo’r a stranger and a foreigner, and
aren’t likely to know their ways; but I knowed it.”

“I am sorry I asked you. Was he angry? He did not speak to you as Hamper
did, did he?”

“He weren’t o’er-civil!” said Nicholas, spinning the penny again, as
much for his own amusement as for that of the children. “Never yo’ fret,
I’m only where I was. I’ll go on tramp to-morrow. I gave him as good as
I got. I telled him, I’d not that good opinion on him that I’d ha’ come
a second time of mysel’; but yo’d advised me for to come, and I were
beholden to yo’.”

“You told him I sent you?”

“I dunno, if I ca’d yo’ by your name. I dunnot think I did. I said a
woman who knew no better had advised me for to come and see if there was
a soft place in his heart.”

“And he—?” asked Margaret.

“Said I were to tell yo’ to mind yo’r own business.—That’s the longest
spin yet, my lads.—And them’s civil words to what he used to me. But
ne’er mind. We’re but where we was; and I’ll break stones on the road
afore I let these little uns clem.”

Margaret put the struggling Johnnie out of her arms, back into his
former place on the dresser.

“I am sorry I asked you to go to Mr. Thornton’s. I am disappointed in
him.”

There was a slight noise behind her. Both she and Nicholas turned round
at the same moment, and there stood Mr. Thornton, with a look of
displeased surprise upon his face. Obeying her swift impulse, Margaret
passed out before him, saying not a word, only bowing low to hide the
sudden paleness that she felt had come over her face. He bent equally
low in return, and then closed the door after her. As she hurried to
Mrs. Boucher’s, she heard the clang, and it seemed to fill up the
measure of her mortification. He too was annoyed to find her there. He
had tenderness in his heart—“a soft place,” as Nicholas Higgins called
it; but he had some pride in concealing it; he kept it very sacred and
safe, and was jealous of every circumstance that tried to gain
admission. But if he dreaded exposure of his tenderness, he was equally
desirous that all men should recognise his justice; and he felt that he
had been unjust in giving so scornful a hearing to any one who had
waited, with humble patience, for five hours, to speak to him. That the
man had spoken saucily to him when he had the opportunity, was nothing
to Mr. Thornton. He rather liked him for it; and he was conscious of his
own irritability of temper at the time, which probably made them both
quits. It was the five hours of waiting that struck Mr. Thornton. He had
not five hours to spare, himself; but one hour—two hours, of his hard
penetrating intellectual, as well as bodily labour, did he give up to
going about collecting evidence as to the truth of Higgins’s story, the
nature of his character, the tenor of his life. He tried not to be, but
was convinced that all that Higgins had said was true. And then the
conviction went in, as if by some spell, and touched the latent
tenderness of his heart; the patience of the man, the simple generosity
of the motive (for he had learnt about the quarrel between Boucher and
Higgins), made him forget entirely the mere reasonings of justice, and
overleap them by a diviner instinct. He came to tell Higgins he would
give him work; and he was more annoyed to find Margaret there than by
hearing her last words; for then he understood that she was the woman
who had urged Higgins to come to him; and he dreaded the admission of
any thought of her, as a motive to what he was doing solely because it
was right.

“So that was the lady you spoke of as a woman?” said he indignantly to
Higgins. “You might have told me who she was.”

“And then, maybe, yo’d have spoken of her more civil than yo’ did; yo’d
getten a mother who might ha’ kept yo’r tongue in check when yo’ were
talking o’ women being at the root of all the plagues.”

“Of course you told that to Miss Hale?”

“In coorse I did. Leastways, I reckon I did. I telled her she weren’t to
meddle again in aught that concerned yo’.”

“Whose children are those—yours?” Mr. Thornton had a pretty good notion
whose they were, from what he had heard; but he felt awkward in turning
the conversation round from this unpromising beginning.

“They’re not mine, and they are mine.”

“They are the children you spoke of to me this morning?”

“When yo’ said,” replied Higgins, turning round, with ill-smothered
fierceness, “that my story might be true or might not, but it were a
very unlikely one. Measter, I’ve not forgotten.”

Mr. Thornton was silent for a moment; then he said: “No more have I. I
remember what I said. I spoke to you about those children in a way I had
no business to. I did not believe you. I could not have taken care of
another man’s children myself, if he had acted towards me as I hear
Boucher did towards you. But I know now you spoke truth. I beg your
pardon.”

Higgins did not turn round, or immediately respond to this. But when he
did speak, it was in a softened tone, although the words were gruff
enough.

“Yo’ve no business to go prying into what happened between Boucher and
me. He’s dead, and I’m sorry. That’s enough.”

“So it is. Will you take work with me? That’s what I came to ask.”

Higgins’s obstinacy wavered, recovered strength, and stood firm. He
would not speak. Mr. Thornton would not ask again. Higgins’s eye fell on
the children.

“Yo’ve called me impudent, and a liar, and a mischief-maker, and yo’
might ha’ said wi’ some truth, as I were now and then given to drink.
An’, I ha’ called you a tyrant, an’ an oud bull dog, and a hard, cruel
master; that’s where it stands. But for th’ childer, Measter, do yo’
think we can e’er get on together?”

“Well!” said Mr. Thornton, half-laughing, “it was not my proposal that
we should go together. But there’s one comfort on your own showing. We
neither of us can think much worse of the other than we do now.”

“That’s true,” said Higgins, reflectively. “I’ve been thinking ever sin’
I saw you, what a marcy it were yo’ did na take me on, for that I ne’er
saw a man whom I could less abide. But that’s maybe been a hasty
judgment; and work’s work to such as me. So, measter, I’ll come; and
what’s more, I thank yo’; and that’s a deal fro’ me,” said he, more
frankly, suddenly turning round and facing Mr. Thornton fully for the
first time.

“And this is a deal from me,” said Mr. Thornton, giving Higgins’s hand a
good grip. “Now mind you come sharp to your time,” continued he,
resuming the master. “I’ll have no laggards at my mill. What fines we
have, we keep pretty sharply. And the first time I catch you making
mischief, off you go. So now you know where you are.”

“Yo’ spoke of my wisdom this morning. I reckon I may bring it wi’ me; or
would yo’ rayther have me ’bout my brains?”

“’Bout your brains if you use them for meddling with my business; with
your brains if you can keep to your own.”

“I shall need a deal o’ brains to settle where my business ends and
yo’rs begins.”

“Your business has not begun yet, and mine stands still for me. So good
afternoon.”

Just before Mr. Thornton came up to Mrs. Boucher’s door, Margaret came
out of it. She did not see him; and he followed her for several yards,
admiring her light and easy walk, and her tall and graceful figure. But,
suddenly, this simple emotion of pleasure was tainted, poisoned by
jealousy. He wished to overtake her, and speak to her, to see how she
would receive him, now she must know he was aware of some other
attachment. He wished too, but of this wish he was rather ashamed, that
she should know that he had justified her wisdom in sending Higgins to
him to ask for work, and had repented him of his morning’s decision. He
came up to her. She started.

“Allow me to say, Miss Hale, that you were rather premature in
expressing your disappointment. I have taken Higgins on.”

“I am glad of it,” said she coldly.

“He tells me, he repeated to you, what I said this morning about—,” Mr.
Thornton hesitated. Margaret took it up:

“About women not meddling. You had a perfect right to express your
opinion, which was a very correct one, I have no doubt. But,” she went
on a little more eagerly, “Higgins did not quite tell you the exact
truth.” The word “truth,” reminded her of her own untruth, and she
stopped short, feeling exceedingly uncomfortable.

Mr. Thornton at first was puzzled to account for her silence; and then
he remembered the lie she had told, and all that was foregone. “The
exact truth!” said he. “Very few people do speak the exact truth. I have
given up hoping for it. Miss Hale, have you no explanation to give me?
You must perceive what I cannot but think.”

Margaret was silent. She was wondering whether an explanation of any
kind would be consistent with her loyalty to Frederick.

“Nay,” said he, “I will ask no farther. I may be putting temptation in
your way. At present, believe me, your secret is safe with me. But you
run great risks, allow me to say, in being so indiscreet. I am only
speaking as a friend of your father’s: if I had any other thought or
hope, of course that is at an end. I am quite disinterested.”

“I am aware of that,” said Margaret, forcing herself to speak in an
indifferent, careless way. “I am aware of what I must appear to you, but
the secret is another person’s, and I cannot explain it without doing
him harm.”

“I have not the slightest wish to pry into the gentleman’s secrets,” he
said, with growing anger. “My own interest in you is—simply that of a
friend. You may not believe me, Miss Hale, but it is—in spite of the
persecution I’m afraid I threatened you with at one time—but that is
all given up; all passed away. You believe me, Miss Hale?”

“Yes,” said Margaret, quietly and sadly.

“Then, really, I don’t see any reason for us to go on walking together.
I thought, perhaps, you might have had something to say, but I see we
are nothing to each other. If you’re quite convinced, that any foolish
passion on my part is entirely over, I wish you good afternoon.” He
walked off very hastily.

“What can he mean?” thought Margaret,—“what could he mean by speaking
so, as if I were always thinking that he cared for me, when I know he
does not; he cannot. His mother will have said all those cruel things
about me to him. But I won’t care for him. I surely am mistress enough
of myself to control this wild, strange, miserable feeling, which
tempted me even to betray my own dear Frederick, so that I might but
regain his good opinion—the good opinion of a man who takes such pains
to tell me that I am nothing to him. Come! poor little heart! be cheery
and brave. We’ll be a great deal to one another, if we are thrown off
and left desolate.”

Her father was almost startled by her merriment this morning. She talked
incessantly, and forced her natural humour to an unusual pitch; and if
there was a tinge of bitterness in much of what she said; if her
accounts of the old Harley Street set were a little sarcastic, her
father could not bear to check her, as he would have done at another
time—for he was glad to see her shake off her cares. In the middle of
the evening, she was called down to speak to Mary Higgins; and when she
came back, Mr. Hale imagined that he saw traces of tears on her cheeks.
But that could not be, for she brought good news—that Higgins had got
work at Mr. Thornton’s mill. Her spirits were damped, at any rate, and
she found it very difficult to go on talking at all, much more in the
wild way that she had done. For some days her spirits varied strangely;
and her father was beginning to be anxious about her, when news arrived
from one or two quarters that promised some change and variety for her.
Mr. Hale received a letter from Mr. Bell, in which that gentleman
volunteered a visit to them; and Mr. Hale imagined that the promised
society of his old Oxford friend would give as agreeable a turn to
Margaret’s ideas as it did to his own. Margaret tried to take an
interest in what pleased her father; but she was too languid to care
about any Mr. Bell, even though he were twenty times her godfather. She
was more roused by a letter from Edith, full of sympathy about her
aunt’s death; full of details about herself, her husband, and child; and
at the end saying, that as the climate did not suit the baby, and as
Mrs. Shaw was talking of returning to England, she thought it probable
that Captain Lennox might sell out, and that they might all go and live
again in the old Harley Street house; which, however, would seem very
incomplete without Margaret. Margaret yearned after that old house, and
the placid tranquility of that well-ordered, monotonous life. She had
found it occasionally tiresome while it lasted; but since then she had
been buffeted about, and felt so exhausted by this recent struggle with
herself, that she thought that even stagnation would be a rest and a
refreshment. So she began to look towards a long visit to the Lennoxes,
on their return to England, as to a point—no, not of hope—but of
leisure, in which she could regain her power and command over herself.
At present it seemed to her as if all subjects tended towards Mr.
Thornton; as if she could not forget him with all her endeavours. If she
went to see the Higginses, she heard of him there; her father had
resumed their readings together, and quoted his opinions perpetually;
even Mr. Bell’s visit brought his tenant’s name upon the tapis; for he
wrote word, that he believed he must be occupied some great part of his
time with Mr. Thornton, as a new lease was in preparation, and the terms
of it must be agreed upon.




CHAPTER XL.

OUT OF TUNE.

    “I have no wrong, where I can claim no right,
     Naught ta’en me fro, where I have nothing had,
     Yet of my woe I cannot so be quite;
     Namely, since that another may be glad
     With that, that thus in sorrow makes me sad.”
                              WYATT.


Margaret had not expected much pleasure to herself from Mr. Bell’s
visit—she had only looked forward to it on her father’s account, but
when her godfather came, she at once fell into the most natural position
of friendship in the world. He said she had no merit in being what she
was, a girl so entirely after his own heart: it was an hereditary power
which she had, to walk in and take possession of his regard; while she,
in reply, gave him much credit for being so fresh and young under his
Fellow’s cap and gown.

“Fresh and young in warmth and kindness, I mean. I’m afraid I must own,
that I think your opinions are the oldest and mustiest I have met with
this long time.”

“Hear this daughter of yours, Hale! Her residence in Milton has quite
corrupted her. She’s a democrat, a red republican, a member of the Peace
Society, a socialist—”

“Papa, it’s all because I’m standing up for the progress of commerce.
Mr. Bell would have had it keep still at exchanging wild-beast skins for
acorns.”

“No, no. I’d dig the ground and grow potatoes. And I’d shave the
wild-beast skin and make the wool into broadcloth. Don’t exaggerate,
missy. But I’m tired of this bustle. Everybody rushing over everybody,
in their hurry to get rich.”

“It is not everyone who can sit comfortably in a set of college rooms
and let his riches grow without any exertion of his own. No doubt there
is many a man here who would be thankful if his property would increase
as yours has done, without his taking any trouble about it,” said Mr.
Hale.

“I don’t believe they would. It’s the bustle and the struggle they like.
As for sitting still, and learning from the past, or shaping out the
future by faithful work done in a prophetic spirit—Why! Pooh! I don’t
believe there’s a man in Milton who knows how to sit still; and it is a
great art.”

“Milton people, I suspect, think Oxford men don’t know how to move. It
would be a very good thing if they mixed a little more.”

“It might be good for the Miltoners. Many things might be good for them
which would be very disagreeable for other people.”

“Are you not a Milton man yourself?” asked Margaret. “I should have
thought you would have been proud of your town.”

“I confess, I don’t see what there is to be proud of. If you’ll only
come to Oxford, Margaret, I will show you a place to glory in.”

“Well!” said Mr. Hale, “Mr. Thornton is coming to drink tea with us
to-night, and he is as proud of Milton as you of Oxford. You two must
try and make each other a little more liberal-minded.”

“I don’t want to be more liberal-minded, thank you,” said Mr. Bell.

“Is Mr. Thornton coming to tea, papa!” asked Margaret in a low voice.

“Either to tea or soon after. He could not tell. He told us not to
wait.”

Mr. Thornton had determined that he would make no inquiry of his mother
as to how far she had put her project into execution of speaking to
Margaret about the impropriety of her conduct. He felt pretty sure that,
if this interview took place, his mother’s account of what passed at it
would only annoy and chagrin him, though he would all the time be aware
of the colouring which it received by passing through her mind. He
shrank from hearing Margaret’s very name mentioned; he, while he blamed
her—while he was jealous of her—while he renounced her—he loved her
sorely, in spite of himself. He dreamt of her; he dreamt she came
dancing towards him with outspread arms, and with a lightness and gaiety
which made him loathe her, even while it allured him. But the impression
of this figure of Margaret—with all Margaret’s character taken out of
it, as completely as if some evil spirit had got possession of her
form—was so deeply stamped upon his imagination, that when he wakened
he felt hardly able to separate the Una from the Duessa; and the dislike
he had to the latter seemed to envelop and disfigure the former. Yet he
was too proud to acknowledge his weakness by avoiding the sight of her.
He would neither seek an opportunity of being in her company nor avoid
it. To convince himself of his power of self-control, he lingered over
every piece of business this afternoon; he forced every movement into
unnatural slowness and deliberation; and it was consequently past eight
o’clock before he reached Mr. Hale’s. Then there were business
arrangements to be transacted in the study with Mr. Bell; and the latter
kept on, sitting over the fire, and talking wearily, long after all
business was transacted, and when they might just as well have gone
upstairs. But Mr. Thornton would not say a word about moving their
quarters; he chafed and chafed, and thought Mr. Bell a most prosy
companion; while Mr. Bell returned the compliment in secret, by
considering Mr. Thornton about as brusque and curt a fellow as he had
ever met with, and terribly gone off both in intelligence and manner. At
last some slight noise in the room above suggested the desirableness of
moving there. They found Margaret with a letter open before her, eagerly
discussing its contents with her father. On the entrance of the
gentlemen, it was immediately put aside; but Mr. Thornton’s eager
senses caught some few words of Mr. Hale’s to Mr. Bell.

“A letter from Henry Lennox. It makes Margaret very hopeful.”

Mr. Bell nodded. Margaret was red as a rose when Mr. Thornton looked at
her. He had the greatest mind in the world to get up and go out of the
room that very instant, and never set foot in the house again.

“We were thinking,” said Mr. Hale, “that you and Mr. Thornton had taken
Margaret’s advice, and were each trying to convert the other, you were
so long in the study.”

“And you thought there would be nothing left of us but an opinion, like
the Kilkenny cat’s tail. Pray whose opinion did you think would have the
most obstinate vitality?”

Mr. Thornton had not a notion what they were talking about, and
disdained to inquire. Mr. Hale politely enlightened him.

“Mr. Thornton, we were accusing Mr. Bell this morning of a kind of
Oxonian mediæval bigotry against his native town; and we—Margaret, I
believe—suggested that it would do him good to associate a little with
Milton manufacturers.”

“I beg your pardon. Margaret thought it would do the Milton
manufacturers good to associate a little more with Oxford men. Now
wasn’t it so, Margaret?”

“I believe I thought it would do both good to see a little more of the
other,—I did not know it was my idea any more than papa’s.”

“And so you see, Mr. Thornton, we ought to have been improving each
other down-stairs, instead of talking over vanished families of Smith’s
and Harrison’s. However, I am willing to do my part now. I wonder when
you Milton men intend to live. All your lives seem to be spent in
gathering together the materials for life.”

“By living, I suppose you mean enjoyment.”

“Yes, enjoyment,—I don’t specify of what, because I trust we should
both consider mere pleasure as very poor enjoyment.”

“I would rather have the nature of the enjoyment defined.”

“Well! enjoyment or leisure—enjoyment of the power and influence which
money gives. You are all striving for money. What do you want it for?”

Mr. Thornton was silent. Then he said, “I really don’t know. But money
is not what _I_ strive for.”

“What then?”

“It is a home question. I shall have to lay myself open to such a
catechist, and I am not sure that I am prepared to do it.”

“No!” said Mr. Hale; “don’t let us be personal in our catechism. You are
neither of you representative men; you are each of you too individual
for that.”

“I am not sure whether to consider that as a compliment or not. I should
like to be the representative of Oxford, with its beauty and its
learning, and its proud old history. What do you say, Margaret; ought I
to be flattered?”

“I don’t know Oxford. But there is a difference between being the
representative of a city and the representative man of its inhabitants.”

“Very true, Miss Margaret. Now I remember, you were against me this
morning, and were quite Miltonian and manufacturing in your
preferences.”

Margaret saw the quick glance of surprise that Mr. Thornton gave her,
and she was annoyed at the construction which he might put on this
speech of Mr. Bell’s. Mr. Bell went on—

“Ah! I wish I could show you our High Street—our Radcliffe Square. I am
leaving out our colleges, just as I give Mr. Thornton leave to omit his
factories in speaking of the charms of Milton. I have a right to abuse
my birth-place. Remember I am a Milton man.”

Mr. Thornton was annoyed more than he ought to have been at all that Mr.
Bell was saying. He was not in a mood for joking. At another time, he
could have enjoyed Mr. Bell’s half testy condemnation of a town where
the life was so at variance with every habit he had formed; but now, he
was galled enough to attempt to defend what was never meant to be
seriously attacked.

“I don’t set up Milton as a model of a town.”

“Not in architecture?” slyly asked Mr. Bell.

“No! We’ve been too busy to attend to mere outward appearances.”

“Don’t say _mere_ outward appearances,” said Mr. Hale, gently. “They
impress us all, from childhood upward—every day of our life.”

“Wait a little while,” said Mr. Thornton. “Remember we are of a
different race from the Greeks, to whom beauty was everything, and to
whom Mr. Bell might speak of a life of leisure and serene enjoyment,
much of which entered in through their outward senses. I don’t mean to
despise them, any more than I would ape them. But I belong to Teutonic
blood; it is little mingled in this part of England to what it is in
others; we retain much of their language; we retain more of their
spirit; we do not look upon life as a time for enjoyment, but as a time
for action and exertion. Our glory and our beauty arise out of our
outward strength, which makes us victorious over material resistance,
and over greater difficulties still. We are Teutonic up here in
Darkshire in another way. We hate to have laws made for us at a
distance. We wish people would allow us to right ourselves, instead of
continually meddling, with their imperfect legislation. We stand up for
self-government, and oppose centralisation.”

“In short, you would like the Heptarchy back again. Well, at any rate, I
revoke what I said this morning—that you Milton people did not
reverence the past. You are regular worshippers of Thor.”

“If we do not reverence the past as you do in Oxford, it is because we
want something which can apply to the present more directly. It is fine
when the study of the past leads to a prophecy of the future. But to men
groping in new circumstances, it would be finer if the words of
experience could direct us how to act in what concerns us most
intimately and immediately; which is full of difficulties to be
encountered; and upon the mode in which they are met and conquered—not
merely pushed aside for the time—depends our future. But no! People can
speak of Utopia much more easily than of the next day’s duty; and yet
when that duty is all done by others, who so ready to cry, ‘Fie, for
shame!’”

“And all this time I don’t see what you are talking about. Would you
Milton men condescend to send up your to-day’s difficulty to Oxford? You
have not tried us yet.”

Mr. Thornton laughed outright at this. “I believe I was talking with
reference to a good deal that has been troubling us of late; I was
thinking of the strikes we have gone through, which are troublesome and
injurious things enough, as I am finding to my cost. And yet this last
strike, under which I am smarting, has been respectable.”

“A respectable strike!” said Mr. Bell. “That sounds as if you were far
gone in the worship of Thor.”

Margaret felt, rather than saw, that Mr. Thornton was chagrined by the
repeated turning into jest of what he was feeling as very serious. She
tried to change the conversation from a subject about which one party
cared little, while, to the other, it was deeply, because personally,
interesting. She forced herself to say something.

“Edith says she finds the printed calicoes in Corfu better and cheaper
than in London.”

“Does she?” said her father, “I think that must be one of Edith’s
exaggerations. Are you sure of it, Margaret?”

“I am sure she says so, papa.”

“Then I am sure of the fact,” said Mr. Bell. “Margaret, I go so far in
my idea of your truthfulness, that it shall cover your cousin’s
character. I don’t believe a cousin of yours could exaggerate.”

“Is Miss Hale so remarkable for truth?” said Mr. Thornton, bitterly. The
moment he had done so, he could have bitten his tongue out. What was he?
And why should he stab her with her shame in this way? How evil he was
to-night: possessed by ill-humour at being detained so long from her;
irritated by the mention of some name, because he thought it belonged to
a more successful lover; now ill-tempered because he had been unable to
cope, with a light heart, against one who was trying, by gay and
careless speeches, to make the evening pass pleasantly away,—the kind
old friend to all parties, whose manner by this time might be well known
to Mr. Thornton, who had been acquainted with him for many years. And
then to speak to Margaret as he had done! She did not get up and leave
the room, as she had done in former days, when his abruptness or his
temper had annoyed her. She sat quite still, after the first momentary
glance of grieved surprise, that made her eyes look like some child’s
who has met with an unexpected rebuff; they slowly dilated into
mournful, reproachful sadness; and then they fell, and she bent over her
work, and did not speak again. But he could not help looking at her, and
he saw a sigh tremble over her body, as if she quivered in some
unwonted chill. He felt as the mother would have done, in the midst of
“her rocking it, and rating it,” had she been called away before her
slow confiding smile, implying perfect trust in mother’s love, had
proved the renewing of its love. He gave short sharp answers; he was
uneasy and cross, unable to discern between jest and earnest; anxious
only for a look, a word of hers, before which to prostrate himself in
penitent humility. But she neither looked nor spoke. Her round taper
fingers flew in and out of her sewing, as steadily and swiftly as if
that were the business of her life. She could not care for him, he
thought, or else the passionate fervour of his wish would have forced
her to raise those eyes, if but for an instant, to read the late
repentance in his. He could have struck her before he left, in order
that by some strange overt act of rudeness, he might earn the privilege
of telling her the remorse that gnawed at his heart. It was well that
the long walk in the open air wound up this evening for him. It sobered
him back into grave resolution that henceforth he would see as little of
her as possible,—since the very sight of that face and form, the very
sounds of that voice (like the soft winds of pure melody) had such power
to move him from his balance. Well! He had known what love was—a sharp
pang, a fierce experience, in the midst of whose flames he was
struggling! but, through the furnace he would fight his way out into the
serenity of middle age,—all the richer and more human for having known
this great passion.

When he had somewhat abruptly left the room, Margaret rose from her
seat, and began silently to fold up her work. The long seams were heavy,
and had an unusual weight for her languid arms. The round lines in her
face took a lengthened, straighter form, and her whole appearance was
that of one who had gone through a day of great fatigue. As the three
prepared for bed, Mr. Bell muttered a little condemnation of Mr.
Thornton.

“I never saw a fellow so spoiled by success. He can’t bear a word; a
jest of any kind. Everything seems to touch on the soreness of his high
dignity. Formerly, he was as simple and noble as the open day; you could
not offend him, because he had no vanity.”

“He is not vain now,” said Margaret, turning round from the table, and
speaking with quiet distinctness. “To-night he has not been like
himself. Something must have annoyed him before he came here.”

Mr. Bell gave her one of his sharp glances from above his spectacles.
She stood it quite calmly; but, after she had left the room, he suddenly
asked,—

“Hale! did it ever strike you that Thornton and your daughter have what
the French call a _tendresse_ for each other?”

“Never!” said Mr. Hale, first startled and then flurried by the new
idea. “No, I am sure you are wrong, I am almost certain you are
mistaken. If there is anything, it is all on Mr. Thornton’s side. Poor
fellow! I hope and trust he is not thinking of her, for I am sure she
would not have him.”

“Well! I’m a bachelor, and have steered clear of love affairs all my
life; so perhaps my opinion is not worth having. Or else I should say
there were very pretty symptoms about her!”

“Then I am sure you are wrong,” said Mr. Hale. “He may care for her,
though she really has been almost rude to him at times. But she!—why,
Margaret would never think of him, I’m sure. Such a thing has never
entered her head.”

“Entering her heart would do. But I merely threw out a suggestion of
what might be. I dare say I was wrong. And whether I was wrong or right,
I’m very sleepy; so, having disturbed your night’s rest (as I can see)
with my untimely fancies, I’ll betake myself with an easy mind to my
own.”

But Mr. Hale resolved that he would not be disturbed by any such
nonsensical idea; so he lay awake, determining not to think about it.

Mr. Bell took his leave the next day, bidding Margaret look to him as
one who had a right to help and protect her in all her troubles, of
whatever nature they might be. To Mr. Hale he said,—

“That Margaret of yours has gone deep into my heart. Take care of her,
for she is a very precious creature,—a great deal too good for
Milton—only fit for Oxford, in fact. The town, I mean; not the men. I
can’t match her yet. When I can, I shall bring my young man to stand
side by side with your young woman, just as the genii in the Arabian
Nights brought Prince Caralmazan to match with the fairy’s Princess
Badoura.”

“I beg you’ll do no such thing. Remember the misfortunes that ensued;
and besides, I can’t spare Margaret.”

“No; on second thoughts, we’ll have her to nurse us ten years hence,
when we shall be two cross old invalids. Seriously, Hale! I wish you’d
leave Milton; which is a most unsuitable place for you, though it was my
recommendation in the first instance. If you would, I’d swallow my
shadows of doubts, and take a college living; and you and Margaret
should come and live at the parsonage—you to be a sort of lay curate,
and take the unwashed off my hands; and she to be our housekeeper—the
village Lady Bountiful—by day; and read us to sleep in the evenings. I
could be very happy in such a life. What do you think of it?”

“Never,” said Mr. Hale, decidedly. “My one great change has been made
and my price of suffering paid. Here I stay out my life; and here will I
be buried, and lost in the crowd.”

“I don’t give up my plan yet. Only I won’t bait you with it any more
just now. Where’s the Pearl. Come, Margaret, give me a farewell kiss;
and remember, my dear, where you may find a true friend, as far as his
capability goes. You are my child, Margaret. Remember that, and God
bless you!”

So they fell back into the monotony of the quiet life they would
henceforth lead. There was no invalid to hope and fear about; even the
Higginses—so long a vivid interest—seemed to have receded from any
need of immediate thought. The Boucher children, left motherless
orphans, claimed what of Margaret’s care she could bestow; and she went
pretty often to see Mary Higgins, who had charge of them. The two
families were living in one house: the elder children were at humble
schools, the younger ones were tended, in Mary’s absence at her work, by
the kind neighbour whose good sense had struck Margaret at the time of
Boucher’s death. Of course she was paid for her trouble; and, indeed, in
all his little plans and arrangements for these orphan children,
Nicholas showed a sober judgment, and regulated method of thinking,
which were at variance with his former more eccentric jerks of action.
He was so steady at his work, that Margaret did not often see him during
these winter months; but when she did, she saw that he winced away from
any reference to the father of those children, whom he had so fully and
heartily taken under his care. He did not speak easily of Mr. Thornton.

“To tell the truth,” said he, “he fairly bamboozles me. He’s two chaps.
One chap I knowed of old as were measter all o’er. T’other chap hasn’t
an ounce of measter’s flesh about him. How them two chaps is bound up in
one body, is a craddy for me to find out. I’ll not be beat by it,
though. Meanwhile he comes here pretty often; that’s how I know the chap
that’s a man, not a measter. And I reckon he’s taken aback by me pretty
much as I am by him; for he sits and listens and stares, as if I were
some strange beast newly caught in some of the zones. But I’m none
daunted. It would take a deal to daunt me in my own house, as he sees.
And I tell him some of my mind that I reckon he’d ha’ been the better of
hearing when he were a younger man.”

“And does he not answer you?” asked Mr. Hale.

“Well! I’ll not say th’ advantage is all on his side, for all I take
credit for improving him above a bit. Sometimes he says a rough thing or
two, which is not agreeable to look at at first, but has a queer smack
o’ truth in it when yo’ come to chew it. He’ll be coming to-night, I
reckon, about them childer’s schooling. He’s not satisfied wi’ the make
of it, and wants for t’ examine ’em.”

“What are they”—began Mr. Hale; but Margaret, touching his arm, showed
him her watch.

“It is nearly seven,” she said. “The evenings are getting longer now.
Come, papa.” She did not breathe freely till they were some distance
from the house. Then, as she became more calm, she wished that she had
not been in so great a hurry; for, somehow, they saw Mr. Thornton but
very seldom now; and he might have come to see Higgins, and for the old
friendship’s sake she should like to have seen him to-night.

Yes! he came very seldom, even for the dull cold purpose of lessons. Mr.
Hale was disappointed in his pupil’s lukewarmness about Greek
literature, which had but a short time ago so great an interest for him.
And now it often happened that a hurried note from Mr. Thornton would
arrive, just at the last moment, saying that he was so much engaged that
he could not come to read with Mr. Hale that evening. And though other
pupils had taken more than his place as to time, no one was like his
first scholar in Mr. Hale’s heart. He was depressed and sad at this
partial cessation of an intercourse which had become dear to him; and he
used to sit pondering over the reason that could have occasioned this
change.

He startled Margaret, one evening as she sate at her work, by suddenly
asking:

“Margaret! had you ever any reason for thinking that Mr. Thornton cared
for you?”

He almost blushed as he put this question; but Mr. Bell’s scouted idea
recurred to him, and the words were out of his mouth before he well knew
what he was about.

Margaret did not answer immediately; but by the bent drooping of her
head, he guessed what her reply would be.

“Yes; I believe—oh, papa, I should have told you.” And she dropped her
work, and hid her face in her hands.

“No, dear; don’t think that I am impertinently curious. I am sure you
would have told me if you had felt that you could return his regard. Did
he speak to you about it?”

No answer at first; but by-and-by a little gentle reluctant “Yes.”

“And you refused him?”

A long sigh: a more helpless, nerveless attitude, and another “Yes.” But
before her father could speak, Margaret lifted up her face, rosy with
some beautiful shame, and, fixing her eyes upon him, said:

“Now, papa, I have told you all this, and I cannot tell you more; and
then the whole thing is so painful to me; every word and action
connected with it is so unspeakably bitter, that I cannot bear to think
of it. Oh, papa, I am sorry to have lost you this friend, but I could
not help it—but oh! I am very sorry.” She sate down on the ground, and
laid her head on his knees.

“I, too, am sorry, my dear. Mr. Bell quite startled me when he said,
some idea of the kind—”

“Mr. Bell! Oh did Mr. Bell see it?”

“A little; but he took it into his head that you—how shall I say
it?—that you were not ungraciously disposed towards Mr. Thornton. I
knew that could never be. I hoped the whole thing was but an
imagination; but I knew too well what your real feelings were to suppose
that you could ever like Mr. Thornton in that way. But I am very sorry.”

They were very quiet and still for some minutes. But, on stroking her
cheek in a caressing way soon after, he was almost shocked to find her
face wet with tears. As he touched her, she sprang up, and smiling with
forced brightness, began to talk of the Lennoxes with such a vehement
desire to turn the conversation, that Mr. Hale was too tender-hearted to
try to force it back into the old channel.

“To-morrow—yes, to-morrow they will be back in Harley Street. Oh, how
strange it will be! I wonder what room they will make into the nursery?
Aunt Shaw will be happy with the baby. Fancy Edith a mamma! And Captain
Lennox—I wonder what he will do with himself now he has sold out!”

“I’ll tell you what,” said her father, anxious to indulge her in this
fresh subject of interest, “I think I must spare you for a fortnight
just to run up to town and see the travellers. You could learn more by
half an hour’s conversation with Mr. Henry Lennox about Frederick’s
chances, than in a dozen of these letters of his; so it would, in fact,
be uniting business with pleasure.”

“No, papa, you cannot spare me, and what’s more, I won’t be spared.”
Then after a pause, she added: “I am losing hope sadly about Frederick;
he is letting us down gently, but I can see that Mr. Lennox himself has
no hope of hunting up the witnesses under years and years of time. No,”
said she, “that bubble was very pretty, and very dear to our hearts; but
it has burst like many another; and we must console ourselves with being
glad that Frederick is so happy, and with being a great deal to each
other. So don’t offend me by talking of being able to spare me, papa,
for I assure you you can’t.”

But the idea of a change took root and germinated in Margaret’s heart,
although not in the way in which her father proposed it at first. She
began to consider how desirable something of the kind would be to her
father, whose spirits, always feeble, now became too frequently
depressed, and whose health, though he never complained, had been
seriously affected by his wife’s illness and death. There were the
regular hours of reading with his pupils, but that all giving and no
receiving could no longer be called companionship, as in the old days
when Mr. Thornton came to study under him. Margaret was conscious of the
want under which he was suffering, unknown to himself; the want of a
man’s intercourse with men. At Helstone there had been perpetual
occasion for an interchange of visits with neighbouring clergymen; and
the poor labourers in the fields, or leisurely tramping home at eve, or
tending their cattle in the forest, were always at liberty to speak or
be spoken to. But in Milton every one was too busy for quiet speech, or
any ripened intercourse of thought; what they said was about business,
very present and actual; and when the tension of mind relating to their
daily affairs was over, they sunk into fallow rest until next morning.
The workman was not to be found after the day’s work was done; he had
gone away to some lecture, or some club, or some beershop, according to
his degree of character. Mr. Hale thought of trying to deliver a course
of lectures at some of the institutions, but he contemplated doing this
so much as an effort of duty, and with so little of the genial impulse
of love towards his work and its end, that Margaret was sure that it
would not be well done until he could look upon it with some kind of
zest.




CHAPTER XLI.

THE JOURNEY’S END.

    I see my way as birds their trackless way—
    I shall arrive! what time, what circuit first,
    I ask not: but unless God sends his hail
    Or blinding fire-balls, sleet, or stifling snow,
    In some time—his good time—I shall arrive;
    He guides me and the bird. In His good time!
              BROWNING’S PARACELSUS.


So the winter was getting on, and the days were beginning to lengthen,
without bringing with them any of the brightness of hope which usually
accompanies the rays of a February sun. Mrs. Thornton had of course
entirely ceased to come to the house. Mr. Thornton came occasionally,
but his visits were addressed to her father, and were confined to the
study. Mr. Hale spoke of him as always the same; indeed, the very rarity
of their intercourse seemed to make Mr. Hale set only the higher value
on it. And from what Margaret could gather of what Mr. Thornton had
said, there was nothing in the cessation of his visits which could arise
from any umbrage or vexation. His business affairs had become
complicated during the strike, and required closer attention than he had
given to them last winter. Nay, Margaret could even discover that he
spoke from time to time of her, and always, as far as she could learn,
in the same calm friendly way, never avoiding and never seeking any
mention of her name.

She was not in spirits to raise her father’s tone of mind. The dreary
peacefulness of the present time had been preceded by so long a period
of anxiety and care—even intermixed with storms—that her mind had lost
its elasticity. She tried to find herself occupation in teaching the two
younger Boucher children, and worked hard at goodness; hard, I say most
truly, for her heart seemed dead to the end of all her efforts; and
though she made them punctually and painfully, yet she stood as far off
as ever from any cheerfulness; her life seemed still bleak and dreary.
The only thing she did well, was what she did out of unconscious piety,
the silent comforting and consoling of her father. Not a mood of his but
what found a ready sympathiser in Margaret; not a wish of his that she
did not strive to forecast, and to fulfil. They were quiet wishes to be
sure, and hardly named without hesitation and apology. All the more
complete and beautiful was her meek spirit of obedience. March brought
the news of Frederick’s marriage. He and Dolores wrote; she in
Spanish-English, as was but natural, and he with little turns and
inversions of words which proved how far the idioms of his bride’s
country were infecting him.

On the receipt of Henry Lennox’s letter, announcing how little hope
there was of his ever clearing himself at a court-martial, in the
absence of the missing witnesses, Frederick had written to Margaret a
pretty vehement letter, containing his renunciation of England as his
country; he wished he could unnative himself, and declared that he would
not take his pardon if it were offered him, nor live in the country if
he had permission to do so. All of which made Margaret cry sorely, so
unnatural did it seem to her at the first opening; but on consideration,
she saw rather in such expression the poignancy of the disappointment
which had thus crushed his hopes; and she felt that there was nothing
for it but patience. In the next letter Frederick spoke so joyfully of
the future that he had no thought for the past; and Margaret found a use
in herself for the patience she had been craving for him. She would have
to be patient. But the pretty, timid, girlish letters of Dolores were
beginning to have a charm for both Margaret and her father. The young
Spaniard was so evidently anxious to make a favourable impression upon
her lover’s English relations, that her feminine care peeped out at
every erasure; and the letters announcing the marriage, were accompanied
by a splendid black lace mantilla, chosen by Dolores herself for her
unseen sister-in-law, whom Frederick had represented as a paragon of
beauty, wisdom and virtue. Frederick’s worldly position was raised by
this marriage on to as high a level as they could desire. Barbour and
Co. was one of the most extensive Spanish houses, and into it he was
received as a junior partner. Margaret smiled a little and then sighed
as she remembered afresh her old tirades against trade. Here was her
preux chevalier of a brother turned merchant, trader! But then she
rebelled against herself, and protested silently against the confusion
implied between a Spanish merchant and a Milton millowner. Well, trade
or no trade, Frederick was very, very happy. Dolores must be charming,
and the mantilla was exquisite! And then she returned to the present
life.

Her father had occasionally experienced a difficulty in breathing this
spring, which had for the time distressed him exceedingly. Margaret was
less alarmed, as this difficulty went off completely in the intervals;
but she still was so desirous of his shaking off the liability
altogether, as to make her very urgent that he should accept Mr. Bell’s
invitation to visit him at Oxford this April. Mr. Bell’s invitation
included Margaret. Nay more, he wrote a special letter commanding her to
come; but she felt as if it would be a greater relief to her to remain
quietly at home, entirely free from any responsibility whatever, and so
to rest her mind and heart in a manner which she had not been able to do
for more than two years past.

When her father had driven off on his way to the railroad, Margaret felt
how great and long had been the pressure on her time and her spirits. It
was astonishing, almost stunning, to feel herself so much at liberty; no
one depending on her for cheering care, if not for positive happiness;
no invalid to plan and think for; she might be idle, and silent and
forgetful,—and what seemed worth more than all the other
privileges—she might be unhappy if she liked. For months past, all her
own personal cares and troubles had had to be stuffed away into a dark
cupboard; but now she had leisure to take them out, and mourn over them,
and study their nature, and seek the true method of subduing them into
the elements of peace. All these weeks she had been conscious of their
existence in a dull kind of way, though they were hidden out of sight.
Now, once for all she would consider them and appoint to each of them
its right work in her life. So she sat almost motionless for hours in
the drawing-room, going over the bitterness of every remembrance with an
unwincing resolution. Only once she cried aloud, at the stinging thought
of the faithlessness which gave birth to that abasing falsehood.

She now would not even acknowledge the force of the temptation; her
plans for Frederick had all failed, and the temptation lay there a dead
mockery,—a mockery which had never had life in it; the lie had been so
despicably foolish, seen by the light of the ensuing events, and faith
in the power of truth so infinitely the greater wisdom!

In her nervous agitation, she unconsciously opened a book of her
father’s that lay upon the table,—the words that caught her eye in it,
seemed almost made for her present state of acute self-abasement:—

     “Je ne voudrois pas reprendre mon cœur en ceste sorte: meurs de
     honte, aveugle, impudent, traistre et desloyal à ton Dieu, et
     sembables choses; mais je voudrois le corriger par voye de
     compassion. Or sus, mon pauvre cœur, nous voilà tombe dans la
     fosse, laquelle nous avions tant resolu d’eschapper. Ah!
     revelons-nous, et quittons-la pour jamais, reclamons la misericorde
     de Dieu, et esperons en elle qu’elle nous assistera pour desormais
     estra plus fermes; et remettons-nous au chemin de l’humilitè.
     Courage, soyons meshuy sur nos gardes, Dieu nous aydera.”

“The way of humility. Ah,” thought Margaret, “that is what I have
missed! But courage, little heart. We will turn back, and by God’s help
we may find the lost path.”

So she rose up, and determined at once to set to on some work which
should take her out of herself. To begin with, she called in Martha, as
she passed the drawing-room door in going up-stairs, and tried to find
out what was below the grave, respectful, servant-like manner, which
crusted over her individual character with an obedience which was almost
mechanical. She found it difficult to induce Martha to speak of any of
her personal interests; but at last she touched the right chord, in
naming Mrs. Thornton. Martha’s whole face brightened, and, on a little
encouragement, out came a long story, of how her father had been in
early life connected with Mrs. Thornton’s husband—nay, had even been in
a position to show him some kindness; what, Martha hardly knew, for it
had happened when she was quite a little child; and circumstances had
intervened to separate the two families until Martha was nearly grown
up, when, her father having sunk lower and lower from his original
occupation as clerk in a warehouse, and her mother being dead, she and
her sister, to use Martha’s own expression, would have been “lost” but
for Mrs. Thornton; who sought them out, and thought for them, and cared
for them.

“I had had the fever, and was but delicate; and Mrs. Thornton and Mr.
Thornton too, they never rested till they had nursed me up in their own
house, and sent me to the sea and all. The doctor said the fever was
catching, but they cared none for that—only Miss Fanny, and she went
a-visiting these folk that she is going to marry into. So though she was
afraid at the time, it has all ended well.”

“Miss Fanny going to be married!” exclaimed Margaret.

“Yes; and to a rich gentleman, too, only he’s a deal older than she is.
His name is Watson; and his mills are somewhere out beyond Hayleigh;
it’s a very good marriage, for all he’s got such gray hair.”

At this piece of information, Margaret was silent long enough for Martha
to recover her propriety, and, with it, her habitual shortness of
answer. She swept up the hearth, asked at what time she should prepare
tea, and quitted the room with the same wooden face with which she had
entered it. Margaret had to pull herself up from indulging a bad trick,
which she had lately fallen into, of trying to imagine how every event
that she heard of in relation to Mr. Thornton would affect him: whether
he would like it or dislike it.

The next day she had the little Boucher children for their lessons, and
took a long walk, and ended by a visit to Mary Higgins. Somewhat to
Margaret’s surprise, she found Nicholas already come home from his work;
the lengthening light had deceived her as to the lateness of the
evening. He too seemed, by his manners, to have entered a little more on
the way of humility; he was quieter, and less self-asserting.

“So th’ oud gentleman’s away on his travels, is he?” said he. “Little
’uns telled me so. Eh! but the’re sharp ’uns they are; I a’most think
they beat my own wenches for sharpness, though m’appen it’s wrong to say
so, and one on ’em in her grave. There’s summut in th’ weather, I
reckon, as sets folk a-wandering. My measter, him at th’ shop yonder, is
spinning about th’ world somewhere.”

“Is that the reason you’re so soon at home to-night?” asked Margaret
innocently.

“Thou know’st nought about it, that’s all,” said he, contemptuously.
“I’m not one wi’ two faces—one for my measter, and t’other for his
back. I counted a’ th’ clocks in the town striking afore I’d leave my
work. No! yon Thornton’s good enough for to fight wi’, but too good for
to be cheated. It were you as getten me the place, and I thank yo’ for
it. Thornton’s is not a bad mill, as times go. Stand down, lad, and say
yo’r pretty hymn to Miss Marget. That’s right; steady on thy legs, and
right arm out as straight as a skewer. One to stop, two to stay, three
mak’ ready, and four away!”

The little fellow repeated a Methodist hymn, far above his comprehension
in point of language, but of which the swinging rhythm had caught his
ear, and which he repeated with all the developed cadence of a member of
parliament. When Margaret had duly applauded, Nicholas called for
another, and yet another, much to her surprise, as she found him thus
oddly and unconsciously led to take an interest in the sacred things
which he had formerly scouted.

It was past the usual tea-time when she reached home; but she had the
comfort of feeling that no one had been kept waiting for her; and of
thinking her own thoughts while she rested, instead of anxiously
watching another person to learn whether to be grave or gay. After tea
she resolved to examine a large packet of letters, and pick out those
that were to be destroyed.

Among them she came to four or five of Mr. Henry Lennox’s, relating to
Frederick’s affairs; and she carefully read them over again, with the
sole intention, when she began, to ascertain exactly on how fine a
chance the justification of her brother hung. But when she had finished
the last, and weighed the pros and cons, the little personal revelation
of character contained in them forced itself on her notice. It was
evident enough, from the stiffness of the wording, that Mr. Lennox had
never forgotten his relation to her in any interest he might feel in the
subject of the correspondence. They were clever letters; Margaret saw
that in a twinkling; but she missed out of them all hearty and genial
atmosphere. They were to be preserved, however, as valuable; so she laid
them carefully on one side. When this little piece of business was
ended, she fell into a reverie; and the thought of her absent father ran
strangely in Margaret’s head that night. She almost blamed herself for
having felt her solitude (and consequently his absence) as a relief; but
these two days had set her up afresh, with new strength and brighter
hope. Plans which had lately appeared to her in the guise of tasks, now
appeared like pleasures. The morbid scales had fallen from her eyes, and
she saw her position and her work more truly. If only Mr. Thornton would
restore her the lost friendship,—nay, if he would only come from time
to time to cheer her father as in former days,—though she should never
see him, she felt as if the course of her future life, though not
brilliant in prospect, might lie clear and even before her. She sighed
as she rose up to go to bed. In spite of the “One step’s enough for
me,”—in spite of the one plain duty of devotion to her father,—there
lay at her heart an anxiety and a pang of sorrow.

And Mr. Hale thought of Margaret, that April evening, just as strangely
and as persistently as she was thinking of him. He had been fatigued by
going about among his old friends and old familiar places. He had had
exaggerated ideas of the change which his altered opinions might make in
his friends’ reception of him; but although some of them might have felt
shocked or grieved, or indignant at his falling off in the abstract, as
soon as they saw the face of the man whom they had once loved, they
forgot his opinions in himself; or only remembered them enough to give
an additional tender gravity to their manner. For Mr. Hale had not been
known to many; he had belonged to one of the smaller colleges, and had
always been shy and reserved; but those who in youth had cared to
penetrate to the delicacy of thought and feeling that lay below his
silence and indecision, took him to their hearts, with something of the
protecting kindness which they would have shown to a woman. And the
renewal of this kindliness, after the lapse of years, and an interval of
so much change, overpowered him more than any roughness or expression of
disapproval could have done.

“I’m afraid we’ve done too much,” said Mr. Bell. “You’re suffering now
from having lived so long in that Milton air.”

“I am tired,” said Mr. Hale. “But it is not Milton air. I’m fifty-five
years of age, and that little fact of itself accounts for any loss of
strength.”

“Nonsense! I’m upwards of sixty, and feel no loss of strength, either
bodily or mental. Don’t let me hear you talking so. Fifty-five! why,
you’re quite a young man.”

Mr. Hale shook his head. “These last few years!” said he. But after a
minute’s pause, he raised himself from his half recumbent position, in
one of Mr. Bell’s luxurious easy-chairs, and said with a kind of
trembling earnestness:

“Bell! you’re not to think, that if I could have foreseen all that would
come of my change of opinion, and my resignation of my living—no! not
even if I could have known how _she_ would have suffered,—that I would
undo it—the act of open acknowledgment that I no longer held the same
faith as the church in which I was a priest. As I think now, even if I
could have foreseen that cruellest martyrdom of suffering, through the
sufferings of one whom I loved, I would have done just the same as far
as that step of openly leaving the church went. I might have done
differently, and acted more wisely, in all that I subsequently did for
my family. But I don’t think God endued me with over-much wisdom or
strength,” he added, falling back into his old position.

Mr. Bell blew his nose ostentatiously before answering. Then he said:

“He gave you strength to do what your conscience told you was right; and
I don’t see that we need any higher or holier strength than that; or
wisdom either. I know I have not that much; and yet men set me down in
their fool’s books as a wise man; an independent character;
strong-minded, and all that cant. The veriest idiot who obeys his own
simple law of right, if it be but in wiping his shoes on a door-mat, is
wiser and stronger than I. But what gulls men are!”

There was a pause. Mr. Hale spoke first, in continuation of his thought:

“About Margaret.”

“Well! about Margaret. What then?”

“If I die——”

“Nonsense!”

“What will become of her—I often think? I suppose the Lennoxes will ask
her to live with them. I try to think they will. Her Aunt Shaw loved her
very well in her own quiet way; but she forgets to love the absent.”

“A very common fault. What sort of people are the Lennoxes?”

“He, handsome, fluent, and agreeable. Edith, a sweet spoiled beauty.
Margaret loves her with all her heart, and Edith with as much of her
heart as she can spare.”

“Now, Hale; you know that girl of yours has got pretty nearly all my
heart. I told you that before. Of course, as your daughter, as my
god-daughter, I took great interest in her before I saw her the last
time. But this visit that I paid to you at Milton made me her slave. I
went, a willing old victim, following the car of the conqueror. For,
indeed, she looks as grand and serene as one who has struggled, and may
be struggling, and yet has the victory secure in sight. Yes, in spite of
all her present anxieties, that was the look on her face. And so, all I
have is at her service, if she needs it; and will be hers, whether she
will or no, when I die. Moreover, I myself, will be her preux chevalier,
sixty and gouty though I be. Seriously, old friend, your daughter shall
be my principal charge in life, and all the help that either my wit or
my wisdom or my willing heart can give, shall be hers. I don’t choose
her out as a subject for fretting. Something, I know of old, you must
have to worry yourself about, or you wouldn’t be happy. But you’re going
to outlive me by many a long year. You, spare, thin men are always
tempting and always cheating Death! It’s the stout, florid fellows like
me, that always go off first.”

If Mr. Bell had had a prophetic eye he might have seen the torch all but
inverted, and the angel with the grave and composed face standing very
nigh, beckoning to his friend. That night Mr. Hale laid his head down
upon the pillow on which it never more should stir with life. The
servant who entered his room in the morning, received no answer to his
speech; drew near the bed, and saw the calm, beautiful face lying white
and cold under the ineffaceable seal of death. The attitude was
exquisitely easy; there had been no pain—no struggle. The action of the
heart must have ceased as he lay down.

Mr. Bell was stunned by the shock; and only recovered when the time came
for being angry at every suggestion of his man’s.

“A coroner’s inquest? Pooh. You don’t think I poisoned him! Dr. Forbes
says it is just the natural end of a heart complaint. Poor old Hale! You
wore out that tender heart of yours before its time. Poor old friend!
how he talked of his—— Wallis, pack up a carpet-bag for me in five
minutes. Here have I been talking. Pack it up, I say. I must go to
Milton by the next train.”

The bag was packed, the cab ordered, the railway reached, in twenty
minutes from the time of this decision. The London train whizzed by,
drew back some yards, and in Mr. Bell was hurried by the impatient
guard. He threw himself back in his seat, to try, with closed eyes, to
understand how one in life yesterday could be dead to-day; and shortly
tears stole out between his grizzled eye-lashes, at the feeling of which
he opened his keen eyes, and looked as severely cheerful as his set
determination could make him. He was not going to blubber before a set
of strangers. Not he!

There was no set of strangers, only one sitting far from him on the same
side. By-and-by Mr. Bell peered at him, to discover what manner of man
it was that might have been observing his emotion; and behind the great
sheet of the outspread “Times,” he recognized Mr. Thornton.

“Why, Thornton! is that you?” said he, removing hastily to a closer
proximity. He shook Mr. Thornton vehemently by the hand, until the gripe
ended in a sudden relaxation, for the hand was wanted to wipe away
tears. He had last seen Mr. Thornton in his friend Hale’s company.

“I’m going to Milton, bound on a melancholy errand. Going to break to
Hale’s daughter the news of his sudden death!”

“Death! Mr. Hale dead!”

“Ay; I keep saying it to myself, ‘Hale is dead!’ but it doesn’t make it
any the more real. Hale is dead for all that. He went to bed well, to
all appearance, last night, and was quite cold this morning when my
servant went to call him.”

“Where? I don’t understand!”

“At Oxford. He came to stay with me: hadn’t been in Oxford this
seventeen years—and this is the end of it.”

Not one word was spoken for above a quarter of an hour. Then Mr.
Thornton said:

“And she!” and stopped full short.

“Margaret you mean. Yes! I am going to tell her. Poor fellow! how full
his thoughts were of her all last night! Good God! Last night only. And
how immeasurably distant he is now! But I take Margaret as my child for
his sake. I said last night I would take her for her own sake. Well, I
take her for both.”

Mr. Thornton made one or two fruitless attempts to speak, before he
could get out the words:

“What will become of her?”

“I rather fancy there will be two people waiting for her: myself for
one. I would take a live dragon into my house to live, if by hiring such
a chaperon, and setting up an establishment of my own, I could make my
old age happy with having Margaret for a daughter. But there are those
Lennoxes!”

“Who are they?” asked Mr. Thornton with trembling interest.

“Oh, smart London people, who very likely will think that they’ve the
best right to her. Captain Lennox married her cousin—the girl she was
brought up with. Good enough people, I dare say. And there’s her Aunt,
Mrs. Shaw. There might be a way open, perhaps, by my offering to marry
that worthy lady! but that would be quite a _pis aller_. And then there’s
that brother!”

“What brother? A brother of her aunt’s?”

“No, no; a clever Lennox (the captain’s a fool, you must understand); a
young barrister, who will be setting his cap at Margaret. I know he has
had her in his mind these five years or more; one of his chums told me
as much; and he was only kept back by want of fortune. Now that will be
done away with.”

“How?” asked Mr. Thornton, too earnestly curious to be aware of the
impertinence of his question.

“Why, she’ll have my money at my death. And if this Henry Lennox is half
good enough for her, and she likes him—well! I might find another way
of getting a home through a marriage. I’m dreadfully afraid of being
tempted, at an unguarded moment, by her aunt.”

Neither Mr. Bell nor Mr. Thornton was in a laughing humour; so the
oddity of any of the speeches which the former made was unnoticed by
them. Mr. Bell whistled, without emitting any sound beyond a long
hissing breath; changed his seat, without finding comfort or rest; while
Mr. Thornton sat immovably still, his eyes fixed on one spot in the
newspaper, which he had taken up in order to give himself leisure to
think.

“Where have you been?” asked Mr. Bell, at length.

“To Havre. Trying to detect the secret of the great rise in the price of
cotton.”

“Ugh! Cotton, and speculations, and smoke, well-cleansed and
well-cared-for machinery, and unwashed and neglected hands. Poor old
Hale! Poor old Hale! If you could have known the change which it was to
him from Helstone. Do you know the New Forest at all?”

“Yes.” (Very shortly.)

“Then you can fancy the difference between it and Milton. What part were
you in? Were you ever at Helstone? a little picturesque village, like
some in the Odenwald? You know Helstone?”

“I have seen it. It was a great change to leave it and come to Milton.”

He took up his newspaper with a determined air, as if resolved to avoid
further conversation; and Mr. Bell was fain to resort to his former
occupation of trying to find out how he could best break the news to
Margaret.

She was at an upstairs window; she saw him alight; she guessed the truth
with an instinctive flash. She stood in the middle of the drawing-room,
as if arrested in her first impulse to rush downstairs, and as if by the
same restraining thought she had been turned to stone; so white and
immovable was she.

“Oh! don’t tell me! I know it from your face! You would have sent—you
would not have left him—if he were alive! Oh, papa, papa!”




CHAPTER XLII.

ALONE! ALONE!

    “When some beloved voice that was to you
    Both sound and sweetness, faileth suddenly,
    And silence, against which you dare not cry,
    Aches round you like a strong disease and new,—
    What hope? what help? what music will undo
    That silence to your sense?”
              MRS. BROWNING.


The shock had been great. Margaret fell into a state of prostration,
which did not show itself in sobs and tears, or even find the relief of
words. She lay on the sofa with her eyes shut, never speaking but when
spoken to, and then replying in whispers. Mr. Bell was perplexed. He
dared not leave her; he dared not ask her to accompany him back to
Oxford, which had been one of the plans he had formed on the journey to
Milton, her physical exhaustion was evidently too complete for her to
undertake any such fatigue—putting the sight that she would have to
encounter out of the question. Mr. Bell sate over the fire, considering
what he had better do. Margaret lay motionless, and almost breathless by
him. He would not leave her, even for the dinner which Dixon had
prepared for him downstairs, and, with sobbing hospitality, would fain
have tempted him to eat. He had a plateful of something brought up to
him. In general, he was particular and dainty enough, and knew well each
shade of flavour in his food, but now the devilled chicken tasted like
sawdust. He minced up some of the fowl for Margaret, and peppered and
salted it well; but when Dixon, following his directions, tried to feed
her, the languid shake of head, proved that in such a state as Margaret
was in, food would only choke, not nourish her.

Mr. Bell gave a great sigh; lifted up his stout old limbs (stiff with
travelling) from their easy position, and followed Dixon out of the
room.

“I can’t leave her. I must write to them at Oxford, to see that the
preparations are made: they can be getting on with these till I arrive.
Can’t Mrs. Lennox come to her? I’ll write and tell her she must. The
girl must have some woman-friend about her, if only to talk her into a
good fit of crying.”

Dixon was crying—enough for two; but, after wiping her eyes and
steadying her voice, she managed to tell Mr. Bell, that Mrs. Lennox was
too near her confinement to be able to undertake any journey at present.

“Well! I suppose we must have Mrs. Shaw; she’s come back to England,
isn’t she?”

“Yes, sir, she’s come back; but I don’t think she will like to leave
Mrs. Lennox at such an interesting time,” said Dixon, who did not much
approve of a stranger entering the household, to share with her in her
ruling care of Margaret.

“Interesting time be——.” Mr. Bell restricted himself by coughing over
the end of his sentence. “She could be content to be at Venice or
Naples, or some of those Popish places, at the last ‘interesting time,’
which took place in Corfu, I think. And what does that little prosperous
woman’s ‘interesting time’ signify, in comparison with that poor
creature there,—that helpless, homeless, friendless, Margaret—lying as
still on that sofa as if it were an altar-tomb, and she the stone statue
on it. I tell you, Mrs. Shaw shall come. See that a room, or whatever
she wants, is got ready for her by to-morrow night. I’ll take care she
comes.”

Accordingly Mr. Bell wrote a letter, which Mrs. Shaw declared, with many
tears, to be so like one of the dear general’s when he was going to have
a fit of the gout, that she should always value and preserve it. If he
had given her the option, by requesting or urging her, as if a refusal
were possible, she might not have come—true and sincere as was her
sympathy with Margaret. It needed the sharp uncourteous command to make
her conquer her vis inertiæ and allow herself to be packed by her maid,
after the latter had completed the boxes. Edith, all cap, shawl, and
tears, came out to the top of the stairs, as Captain Lennox was taking
her mother down to the carriage:

“Don’t forget, mamma; Margaret must come and live with us. Sholto will
go to Oxford on Wednesday, and you must send word by Mr. Bell to him
when we’re to expect you. And if you want Sholto, he can go on from
Oxford to Milton. Don’t forget, mamma; you are to bring back Margaret.”

Edith re-entered the drawing-room. Mr. Henry Lennox was there, cutting
open the pages of a new Review. Without lifting his head, he said, “If
you don’t like Sholto to be so long absent from you, Edith, I hope you
will let me go down to Milton, and give what assistance I can.”

“Oh, thank you,” said Edith, “I dare say old Mr. Bell will do everything
he can, and more help may not be needed. Only one does not look for much
savoir-faire from a resident Fellow. Dear, darling Margaret; won’t it be
nice to have her here, again? You were both great allies, years ago.”

“Were we?” asked he indifferently, with an appearance of being
interested in a passage in the Review.

“Well, perhaps not—I forget. I was so full of Sholto. But doesn’t it
fall out well, that if my uncle was to die, it should be just now, when
we are come home, and settled in the old house, and quite ready to
receive Margaret? Poor thing! what a change it will be to her from
Milton! I’ll have new chintz for her bed-room, and make it look new and
bright, and cheer her up a little.”

In the same spirit of kindness, Mrs. Shaw journeyed to Milton,
occasionally dreading the first meeting, and wondering how it would be
got over; but more frequently planning how soon she could get Margaret
away from “that horrid place,” and back in the pleasant comforts of
Harley Street.

“Oh dear!” she said to her maid; “look at those chimneys! My poor
sister Hale! I don’t think I could have rested at Naples, if I had known
what it was! I must have come and fetched her and Margaret away.” And to
herself she acknowledged, that she had always thought her brother-in-law
rather a weak man, but never so weak as now, when she saw for what a
place he had exchanged the lovely Helstone home.

Margaret had remained in the same state; white, motionless, speechless,
tearless. They had told her that her aunt Shaw was coming; but she had
not expressed either surprise or pleasure, or dislike to the idea. Mr.
Bell, whose appetite had returned, and who appreciated Dixon’s
endeavours to gratify it, in vain urged upon her to taste some
sweetbreads stewed with oysters; she shook her head with the same quiet
obstinacy as on the previous day; and he was obliged to console himself
for her rejection, by eating them all himself. But Margaret was the
first to hear the stopping of the cab that brought her aunt from the
railway station. Her eyelids quivered, her lips coloured and trembled.
Mr. Bell went down to meet Mrs. Shaw; and when they came up, Margaret
was standing, trying to steady her dizzy self; and when she saw her
aunt, she went forward to the arms open to receive her, and first found
the passionate relief of tears on her aunt’s shoulder. All thoughts of
quiet habitual love, of tenderness for years, of relationship to the
dead, all that inexplicable likeness in look, tone, and gesture, that
seem to belong to one family, and which reminded Margaret so forcibly at
this moment of her mother, came in to melt and soften her numbed heart
into the overflow of warm tears.

Mr. Bell stole out of the room, and went down into the study, where he
ordered a fire, and tried to divert his thoughts by taking down and
examining the different books. Each volume brought a remembrance or a
suggestion of his dead friend. It might be a change of employment from
his two days’ work of watching Margaret, but it was no change of
thought. He was glad to catch the sound of Mr. Thornton’s voice, making
enquiry at the door. Dixon was rather cavalierly dismissing him; for
with the appearance of Mrs. Shaw’s maid, came visions of former
grandeur, of the Beresford blood, of the “station” (so she was pleased
to term it) from which her young lady had been ousted, and to which she
was now, please God, to be restored. These visions, which she had been
dwelling on with complacency in her conversation with Mrs. Shaw’s maid
(skilfully eliciting meanwhile all the circumstances of state and
consequence connected with the Harley Street establishment, for the
edification of the listening Martha), made Dixon rather inclined to be
supercilious in her treatment of any inhabitant of Milton; so, though
she always stood rather in awe of Mr. Thornton, she was as curt as she
durst be in telling him that he could see none of the inmates of the
house that night. It was rather uncomfortable to be contradicted in her
statement by Mr. Bell’s opening the study-door, and calling out:

“Thornton! is that you? Come in for a minute or two; I want to speak to
you.” So Mr. Thornton went into the study, and Dixon had to retreat into
the kitchen, and reinstate herself in her own esteem by a prodigious
story of Sir John Beresford’s coach and six, when he was high sheriff.

“I don’t know what I wanted to say to you after all. Only it’s dull
enough to sit in a room where everything speaks to you of a dead friend.
Yet Margaret and her aunt must have the drawing-room to themselves!”

“Is Mrs.—is her aunt come?” asked Mr. Thornton.

“Come? Yes! maid and all. One would have thought she might have come by
herself at such a time! And now I shall have to turn out and find my way
to the Clarendon.”

“You must not go to the Clarendon. We have five or six empty bed-rooms
at home.”

“Well aired?”

“I think you may trust my mother for that.”

“Then I’ll only run upstairs and wish that wan girl good-night, and make
my bow to her aunt, and go off with you straight.”

Mr. Bell was some time upstairs. Mr. Thornton began to think it long,
for he was full of business, and had hardly been able to spare the time
for running up to Crampton, and enquiring how Miss Hale was.

When they had set out upon their walk, Mr. Bell said:

“I was kept by those women in the drawing-room. Mrs. Shaw is anxious to
get home—on account of her daughter, she says—and wants Margaret to go
off with her at once. Now she is no more fit for travelling than I am
for flying. Besides, she says, and very justly, that she has friends she
must see—that she must wish good-bye to several people; and then her
aunt worried her about old claims, and was she forgetful of old friends?
And she said, with a great burst of crying, she should be glad enough to
go from a place where she had suffered so much. Now I must return to
Oxford to-morrow, and I don’t know on which side of the scale to throw
in my voice.”

He paused, as if asking a question; but he received no answer from his
companion, the echo of whose thoughts kept repeating—

“Where she had suffered so much.” Alas! and that was the way in which
this eighteen months in Milton—to him so unspeakably precious, down to
its very bitterness, which was worth all the rest of life’s
sweetness—would be remembered. Neither loss of father, nor loss of
mother, dear as she was to Mr. Thornton, could have poisoned the
remembrance of the weeks, the days, the hours, when a walk of two miles,
every step of which was pleasant, as it brought him nearer and nearer to
her, took him to her sweet presence—every step of which was rich, as
each recurring moment that bore him away from her made him recall some
fresh grace in her demeanour, or pleasant pungency in her character.
Yes! whatever had happened to him, external to his relation to her, he
could never have spoken of that time, when he could have seen her every
day—when he had her within his grasp, as it were—as a time of
suffering. It had been a royal time of luxury to him, with all its
stings and contumelies, compared to the poverty that crept round and
clipped the anticipation of the future down to sordid fact, and life
without an atmosphere of either hope or fear.

Mrs. Thornton and Fanny were in the dining-room; the latter in a flutter
of small exultation, as the maid held up one glossy material after
another, to try the effect of the wedding-dresses by candle-light. Her
mother really tried to sympathise with her, but could not. Neither taste
nor dress were in her line of subjects, and she heartily wished that
Fanny had accepted her brother’s offer of having the wedding clothes
provided by some first-rate London dressmaker, without the endless
troublesome discussions, and unsettled waverings, that arose out of
Fanny’s desire to choose and superintend everything herself. Mr.
Thornton was only too glad to mark his grateful approbation of any
sensible man, who could be captivated by Fanny’s second-rate airs and
graces, by giving her ample means for providing herself with the finery,
which certainly rivalled, if it did not exceed, the lover in her
estimation. When her brother and Mr. Bell came in, Fanny blushed and
simpered, and fluttered over the signs of her employment, in a way which
could not have failed to draw attention from any one else but Mr. Bell.
If he thought about her and her silks and satins at all, it was to
compare her and them with the pale sorrow he had left behind him,
sitting motionless, with bent head and folded hands, in a room where the
stillness was so great that you might almost fancy the rush in your
straining ears was occasioned by the spirits of the dead, yet hovering
round their beloved. For when Mr. Bell had first gone upstairs, Mrs.
Shaw lay asleep on the sofa; and no sound broke the silence.

Mrs. Thornton gave Mr. Bell her formal, hospitable welcome. She was
never so gracious as when receiving her son’s friends in her son’s
house; and the more unexpected they were, the more honour to her
admirable housekeeping preparations for comfort.

“How is Miss Hale?” she asked.

“About as broken down by this last stroke as she can be.”

“I am sure it is very well for her that she has such a friend as you.”

“I wish I were her only friend, madam. I daresay it sounds very brutal;
but here have I been displaced, and turned out of my post of comforter
and adviser by a fine lady aunt; and there are cousins and what not
claiming her in London, as if she were a lap-dog belonging to them. And
she is too weak and miserable to have a will of her own.”

“She must indeed be weak,” said Mrs. Thornton, with an implied meaning
which her son understood well. “But where,” continued Mrs. Thornton,
“have these relations been all this time that Miss Hale has appeared
almost friendless, and has certainly had a good deal of anxiety to
bear?” But she did not feel interest enough in the answer to her
question to wait for it. She left the room to make her household
arrangements.

“They have been living abroad. They have some kind of claim upon her. I
will do them that justice. The aunt brought her up, and she and the
cousin have been like sisters. The thing vexing me, you see, is that I
wanted to take her for a child of my own; and I am jealous of these
people, who don’t seem to value the privilege of their right. Now it
would be different if Frederick claimed her.”

“Frederick!” exclaimed Mr. Thornton. “Who is he? What right——?” He
stopped short in his vehement question.

“Frederick,” said Mr. Bell in surprise. “Why, don’t you know? He’s her
brother. Have you not heard——”

“I never heard his name before. Where is he? Who is he?”

“Surely I told you about him, when the family first came to Milton—the
son who was concerned in that mutiny.”

“I never heard of him till this moment. Where does he live?”

“In Spain. He’s liable to be arrested the moment he sets foot on English
ground. Poor fellow! he will grieve at not being able to attend his
father’s funeral. We must be content with Captain Lennox; for I don’t
know of any other relation.”

“I hope I may be allowed to go?”

“Certainly; thankfully. You’re a good fellow, after all, Thornton. Hale
liked you. He spoke to me, only the other day, at Oxford. He regretted
he had seen so little of you lately. I am obliged to you for wishing to
show him respect.”

“But about Frederick. Does he never come to England?”

“Never.”

“He was not over here about the time of Mrs. Hale’s death?”

“No. Why, I was here then. I hadn’t seen Hale for years and years: and,
if you remember, I came—No, it was some time after that that I came.
But poor Frederick Hale was not here then. What made you think he was?”

“I saw a young man walking with Miss Hale one day,” replied Mr.
Thornton, “and I think it was about that time.”

“Oh, that would be this young Lennox, the Captain’s brother. He’s a
lawyer, and they were in pretty constant correspondence with him; and I
remember Mr. Hale told me he thought he would come down. Do you know,”
said Mr. Bell, wheeling round, and shutting one eye, the better to bring
the forces of the other to bear with keen scrutiny on Mr. Thornton’s
face, “that I once fancied you had a little tenderness for Margaret?”

No answer. No change of countenance.

“And so did poor Hale. Not at first, and not till I had put it into his
head.”

“I admired Miss Hale. Every one must do so. She is a beautiful
creature,” said Mr. Thornton, driven to bay by Mr. Bell’s pertinacious
questioning.

“Is that all! You can speak of her in that measured way, as simply a
‘beautiful creature’—only something to catch the eye. I did hope you
had had nobleness enough in you to make you pay her the homage of the
heart. Though I believe—in fact I know, she would have rejected you,
still to have loved her without return would have lifted you higher than
all those, be they who they may, that have ever known her to love.
‘Beautiful creature’ indeed! Do you speak of her as you would of a horse
or a dog?”

Mr. Thornton’s eyes glowed like red embers.

“Mr. Bell,” said he, “before you speak so, you should remember that all
men are not as free to express what they feel as you are. Let us talk of
something else.” For though his heart leaped up, as at a trumpet-call,
to every word that Mr. Bell had said, and though he knew that what he
had said would henceforward bind the thought of the old Oxford Fellow
closely up with the most precious things of his heart, yet he would not
be forced into any expression of what he felt towards Margaret. He was
no mocking-bird of praise to try, because another extolled what he
reverenced and passionately loved, to outdo him in laudation. So he
turned to some of the dry matters of business that lay between Mr. Bell
and him, as landlord and tenant.

“What is that heap of brick and mortar we came against in the yard? Any
repairs wanted?”

“No, none, thank you.”

“Are you building on your own account? If you are, I’m very much obliged
to you.”

“I’m building a dining-room—for the men I mean—the hands.”

“I thought you were hard to please, if this room wasn’t good enough to
satisfy you, a bachelor.”

“I’ve got acquainted with a strange kind of chap, and I put one or two
children in whom he is interested to school. So, as I happened to be
passing near his house one day, I just went there about some trifling
payment to be made; and I saw such a miserable black frizzle of a
dinner—a greasy cinder of meat, as first set me a-thinking. But it was
not till provisions grew so high this winter that I bethought me how, by
buying things wholesale, and cooking a good quantity of provisions
together, much money might be saved, and much comfort gained. So I spoke
to my friend—or my enemy—the man I told you of—and he found fault
with every detail of my plan; and in consequence I laid it aside, both
as impracticable, and also because if I forced it into operation I
should be interfering with the independence of my men; when, suddenly,
this Higgins came to me and graciously signified his approval of a
scheme so nearly the same as mine, that I might fairly have claimed it;
and, moreover, the approval of several of his fellow-workmen, to whom he
had spoken. I was a little ‘riled,’ I confess, by his manner, and
thought of throwing the whole thing overboard to sink or swim. But it
seemed childish to relinquish a plan which I had once thought wise and
well-laid, just because I myself did not receive all the honour and
consequence due to the originator. So I coolly took the part assigned to
me, which is something like that of a steward to a club. I buy in the
provisions wholesale, and provide a fitting matron or cook.”

“I hope you give satisfaction in your new capacity. Are you a good judge
of potatoes and onions? But I suppose Mrs. Thornton assists you in your
marketing.”

“Not a bit,” replied Mr. Thornton. “She disapproves of the whole plan,
and now we never mention it to each other. But I manage pretty well,
getting in great stocks from Liverpool, and being served in butcher’s
meat by our own family butcher. I can assure you, the hot dinners the
matron turns out are not to be despised.”

“Do you taste each dish as it goes in, in virtue of your office? I hope
you have a white wand.”

“I was very scrupulous, at first, in confining myself to the mere
purchasing part, and even in that I rather obeyed the men’s orders,
conveyed through the housekeeper, than went by my own judgment. At one
time, the beef was too large, at another the mutton was not fat enough.
I think they saw how careful I was to leave them free, and not to
intrude my own ideas upon them; so, one day, two or three of the men—my
friend Higgins among them—asked me if I would not come in and take a
snack. It was a very busy day, but I saw that the men would be hurt if,
after making the advance, I didn’t meet them half-way, so I went in, and
I never made a better dinner in my life. I told them (my next neighbours
I mean, for I’m no speech-maker) how much I enjoyed it; and for some
time, whenever that especial dinner recurred in their dietary, I was
sure to be met by these men, with a ‘Master, there’s hot-pot for dinner
to-day, win yo’ come in?’ If they had not asked me, I would no more have
intruded on them than I’d have gone to the mess at the barracks without
invitation.”

“I should think you were rather a restraint on your hosts’ conversation.
They can’t abuse the masters while you’re there. I expect they take it
out on non-hot-pot days.”

“Well! hitherto we’ve steered clear of all vexed questions. But if any
of the old disputes came up again, I would certainly speak out my mind
next hot-pot day. But you are hardly acquainted with our Darkshire
fellows, for all you’re a Darkshire man yourself. They have such a sense
of humour, and such a racy mode of expression! I am getting really to
know some of them now, and they talk pretty freely before me.”

“Nothing like the act of eating for equalising men. Dying is nothing to
it. The philosopher dies sententiously—the pharisee ostentatiously—the
simple-hearted humbly—the poor idiot blindly, as the sparrow falls to
the ground; the philosopher and idiot, publican and pharisee, all eat
after the same fashion—given an equally good digestion. There’s theory
for theory for you!”

“Indeed I have no theory; I hate theories.”

“I beg your pardon. To show my penitence, will you accept a ten pound
note towards your marketing, and give the poor fellows a feast?”

“Thank you; but I’d rather not. They pay me rent for the oven and
cooking-places at the back of the mill: and will have to pay more for
the new dining-room. I don’t want it to fall into a charity. I don’t
want donations. Once let in the principle, and I should have people
going and talking, and spoiling the simplicity of the whole thing.”

“People will talk about any new plan. You can’t help that.”

“My enemies, if I have any, may make a philanthropic fuss about this
dinner-scheme; but you are a friend, and I expect that you will now pay
my experiment the respect of silence. It is but a new broom at present,
and sweeps clean enough. But by-an-bye we shall meet with plenty of
stumbling-blocks, no doubt.”




CHAPTER XLIII.

MARGARET’S FLITTIN’.

    “The meanest thing to which we bid adieu,
    Loses its meanness in the parting hour.”
              ELLIOTT.


Mrs. Shaw took as vehement a dislike as it was possible for one of her
gentle nature to do, against Milton. It was noisy, and smoky, and the
poor people whom she saw in the streets were dirty, and the rich ladies
over-dressed, and not a man that she saw, high or low, had his clothes
made to fit him. She was sure Margaret would never regain her lost
strength while she stayed in Milton; and she herself was afraid of one
of her old attacks of the nerves. Margaret must return with her, and
that quickly. This, if not the exact force of her words, was at any rate
the spirit of what she urged on Margaret, till the latter, weak, weary,
and broken-spirited, yielded a reluctant promise that, as soon as
Wednesday was over, she would prepare to accompany her aunt back to
town, leaving Dixon in charge of all the arrangements for paying bills,
disposing of furniture, and shutting up the house. Before that
Wednesday—that mournful Wednesday, when Mr. Hale was to be interred,
far away from either of the homes he had known in life, and far away
from the wife who lay lonely among strangers (and this last was
Margaret’s great trouble, for she thought that if she had not given way
to that overwhelming stupor during the first sad days, she could have
arranged things otherwise)—before that Wednesday, Margaret received a
letter from Mr. Bell.

     “MY DEAR MARGARET:—I did mean to have returned to Milton on
     Thursday, but unluckily it turns out to be one of the rare
     occasions when we, Plymouth Fellows, are called upon to perform any
     kind of duty, and I must not be absent from my post. Captain Lennox
     and Mr. Thornton are here. The former seems a smart, well-meaning
     man; and has proposed to go over to Milton, and assist you in any
     search for the will; of course there is none, or you would have
     found it by this time, if you followed my directions. Then the
     Captain declares he must take you and his mother-in-law home; and,
     in his wife’s present state, I don’t see how you can expect him to
     remain away longer than Friday. However, that Dixon of yours is
     trusty; and can hold her, or your own, till I come. I will put
     matters into the hands of my Milton attorney if there is no will;
     for I doubt this smart Captain is no great man of business.
     Nevertheless, his moustachios are splendid. There will have to be a
     sale, so select what things you wish to be reserved. Or you can
     send a list afterwards. Now two things more, and I have done. You
     know, or if you don’t, your poor father did, that you are to have
     my money and goods when I die. Not that I mean to die yet; but I
     name this just to explain what is coming. These Lennoxes seem very
     fond of you now; and perhaps may continue to be; perhaps not. So it
     is best to start with a formal agreement; namely, that you are to
     pay to them two hundred and fifty pounds a year, as long as you and
     they find it pleasant to live together. (This, of course, includes
     Dixon; mind you don’t be cajoled into paying more for her.) Then
     you won’t be thrown adrift, if some day the captain wishes to have
     his house to himself, but you can carry yourself and your two
     hundred and fifty pounds off somewhere else; if, indeed, I have
     not claimed you to come and keep house for me first. Then as to
     dress, and Dixon, and personal expenses, and confectionery (all
     young ladies eat confectionery till wisdom comes by age), I shall
     consult some lady of my acquaintance, and see how much you will
     have from your father before fixing this. Now, Margaret, have you
     flown out before you have read this far, and wondered what right
     the old man has to settle your affairs for you so cavalierly? I
     make no doubt you have. Yet the old man has a right. He has loved
     your father for five and thirty years; he stood beside him on his
     wedding-day; he closed his eyes in death. Moreover, he is your
     godfather; and as he cannot do you much good spiritually, having a
     hidden consciousness of your superiority in such things, he would
     fain do you the poor good of endowing you materially. And the old
     man has not a known relation on earth; ‘who is there to mourn for
     Adam Bell?’ and his whole heart is set and bent upon this one
     thing, and Margaret Hale is not the girl to say him nay. Write by
     return if only two lines, to tell me your answer. But _no thanks_.”

Margaret took up a pen and scrawled with trembling hand, “Margaret Hale
is not the girl to say him nay.” In her weak state she could not think
of any other words, and yet, she was vexed to use these. But she was so
much fatigued even by this slight exertion, that if she could have
thought of another form of acceptance, she could not have sate up to
write a syllable of it. She was obliged to lie down again and try not to
think.

“My dearest child! Has that letter vexed or troubled you?”

“No!” said Margaret feebly. “I shall be better when to-morrow is over.”

“I feel sure, darling, you won’t be better till I get you out of this
horrid air. How you can have borne it these two years I can’t imagine.”

“Where could I go to? I could not leave papa and mamma.”

“Well, don’t distress yourself, my dear. I dare say it was all for the
best, only I had no conception of how you were living. Our butler’s wife
lives in a better house than this.”

“It is sometimes very pretty—in summer; you can’t judge by what it is
now. I have been very happy here,” and Margaret closed her eyes by way
of stopping the conversation.

The house teemed with comfort now, compared to what it had been. The
evenings were chilly, and by Mrs. Shaw’s directions fires were lighted
in every bedroom. She petted Margaret in every possible way, and bought
every delicacy, or soft luxury in which she herself would have burrowed
and sought comfort. But Margaret was indifferent to all these things;
or, if they forced themselves upon her attention, it was simply as
causes for gratitude to her aunt, who was putting herself so much out of
the way to think of her. She was restless, though so weak. All the day
long, she kept herself from thinking of the ceremony which was going on
at Oxford, by wandering from room to room, and languidly setting aside
such articles as she wished to retain. Dixon followed her by Mrs. Shaw’s
desire, ostensibly to receive instructions, but with a private
injunction to soothe her into repose as soon as might be.

“These books, Dixon, I will keep. All the rest will you send to Mr.
Bell? They are of a kind that he will value for themselves, as well as
for papa’s sake. This—— I should like you to take this to Mr.
Thornton, after I am gone. Stay; I will write a note with it.” And she
sate down hastily, as if afraid of thinking, and wrote:

     “DEAR SIR,—The accompanying book I am sure will be valued by you
     for the sake of my father, to whom it belonged.

                                                      “Yours sincerely,

                                                        MARGARET HALE.”

She set out again upon her travels through the house, turning over
articles, known to her from her childhood, with a sort of caressing
reluctance to leave them—old-fashioned, worn and shabby, as they might
be. But she hardly spoke again; and Dixon’s report to Mrs. Shaw was,
that “she doubted whether Miss Hale heard a word of what she said,
though she talked the whole time, in order to divert her intention.” The
consequence of her being on her feet all day was excessive bodily
weariness in the evening, and a better night’s rest than she had had
since she heard of Mr. Hale’s death.

At breakfast time the next day, she expressed her wish to go and bid one
or two friends good-bye. Mrs. Shaw objected:

“I am sure, my dear, you can have no friends here with whom you are
sufficiently intimate to justify you in calling upon them so soon;
before you have been at church.”

“But to-day is my only day; if Captain Lennox comes this afternoon, and
if we must—if I must really go to-morrow——”

“Oh, yes, we shall go to-morrow. I am more and more convinced that this
air is bad for you, and makes you look so pale and ill; besides, Edith
expects us; and she may be waiting for me; and you cannot be left alone,
my dear, at your age. No; if you must make these calls, I will go with
you. Dixon can get us a coach, I suppose?”

So Mrs. Shaw went to take care of Margaret and took her maid with her to
take care of the shawls and air-cushions. Margaret’s face was too sad to
lighten up into a smile at all this preparation for paying two visits,
that she had often made by herself at all hours of the day. She was half
afraid of owning that one place to which she was going was Nicholas
Higgins’; all she could do was to hope her aunt would be indisposed to
get out of the coach and walk up the court, and at every breath of wind
have her face slapped by wet clothes, hanging out to dry on ropes
stretched from house to house.

There was a little battle in Mrs. Shaw’s mind between ease and a sense
of matronly propriety; but the former gained the day; and with many an
injunction to Margaret to be careful of herself, and not to catch any
fever, such as was always lurking in such places, her aunt permitted her
to go where she had often been before without taking any precaution or
requiring any permission.

Nicholas was out; only Mary and one or two of the Boucher children at
home. Margaret was vexed with herself for not having timed her visit
better. Mary had a very blunt intellect, although her feelings were warm
and kind; and the instant she understood what Margaret’s purpose was in
coming to see them, she began to cry and sob with so little restraint
that Margaret found it useless to say any of the thousand little things
which had suggested themselves to her as she was coming along in the
coach. She could only try to comfort her a little by suggesting the
vague chance of their meeting again, at some possible time, in some
possible place, and bid her tell her father how much she wished, if he
could manage it, that he should come to see her when he had done his
work in the evening.

As she was leaving the place, she stopped and looked around; then
hesitated a little before she said:

“I should like to have some little thing to remind me of Bessy.”

Instantly Mary’s generosity was keenly alive. What could they give? And
on Margaret’s singling out a little common drinking-cup, which she
remembered as the one always standing by Bessy’s side with a drink for
her feverish lips, Mary said:

“Oh, take summat better; that only cost fourpence!”

“That will do, thank you,” said Margaret; and she went quickly away,
while the light caused by the pleasure of having something to give yet
lingered on Mary’s face.

“Now to Mrs. Thornton’s,” thought she to herself. “It must be done.” But
she looked rather rigid and pale at the thoughts of it, and had hard
work to find the exact words in which to explain to her aunt who Mrs.
Thornton was, and why she should go to bid her farewell.

They (for Mrs. Shaw alighted here) were shown into the drawing-room, in
which a fire had only just been kindled. Mrs. Shaw huddled herself up in
her shawl and shivered.

“What an icy room!” she said.

They had to wait for some time before Mrs. Thornton entered. There was
some softening in her heart towards Margaret, now that she was going
away out of her sight. She remembered her spirit, as shown at various
times and places, even more than the patience with which she had endured
long and wearing cares. Her countenance was blander than usual, as she
greeted her; there was even a shade of tenderness in her manner, as she
noticed the white, tear-swollen face, and the quiver in the voice which
Margaret tried to make so steady.

“Allow me to introduce my aunt, Mrs. Shaw. I am going away from Milton
to-morrow; I do not know if you are aware of it, but I wanted to see you
once again, Mrs. Thornton, to—to apologize for my manner the last time
I saw you; and to say that I am sure you meant kindly—however much we
may have misunderstood each other.”

Mrs. Shaw looked extremely perplexed by what Margaret had said. Thanks
for kindness! and apologies for failure in good manners! But Mrs.
Thornton replied:

“Miss Hale, I am glad you do me justice. I did no more than I believed
to be my duty in remonstrating with you as I did. I have always desired
to act the part of a friend to you. I am glad you do me justice.”

“And,” said Margaret, blushing excessively as she spoke, “will you do me
justice, and believe that though I cannot—I do not choose—to give
explanations of my conduct, I have not acted in the unbecoming way you
apprehended?”

Margaret’s voice was so soft, and her eyes so pleading, that Mrs.
Thornton was for once affected by the charm of manner to which she had
hitherto proved herself invulnerable.

“Yes, I do believe you. Let us say no more about it. Where are you going
to reside, Miss Hale? I understood from Mr. Bell that you were going to
leave Milton. You never liked Milton, you know,” said Mrs. Thornton,
with a sort of grim smile; “but for all that, you must not expect me to
congratulate you on quitting it. Where shall you live?”

“With my aunt,” replied Margaret, turning towards Mrs. Shaw.

“My niece will reside with me in Harley Street. She is almost like a
daughter to me,” said Mrs. Shaw, looking fondly at Margaret; “and I am
glad to acknowledge my own obligation for any kindness that has been
shown to her. If you and your husband ever come to the town, my son and
daughter, Captain and Mrs. Lennox, will, I am sure, join with me in
wishing to do anything in our power to show you attention.”

Mrs. Thornton thought in her own mind, that Margaret had not taken much
care to enlighten her aunt as to the relationship between the Mr. and
Mrs. Thornton, towards whom the fine-lady aunt was extending her soft
patronage; so she answered shortly,

“My husband is dead. Mr. Thornton is my son. I never go to London; so I
am not likely to be able to avail myself of your polite offers.”

At this instant Mr. Thornton entered the room; he had only just returned
from Oxford. His mourning suit spoke of the reason that had called him
there.

“John,” said his mother, “this lady is Mrs. Shaw, Miss Hale’s aunt. I am
sorry to say, that Miss Hale’s call is to wish us good-bye.”

“You are going then!” said he in a low voice.

“Yes,” said Margaret. “We leave to-morrow.”

“My son-in-law comes this evening to escort us,” said Mrs. Shaw.

Mr. Thornton turned away. He had not sat down, and now he seemed to be
examining something on the table, almost as if he had discovered an
unopened letter, which had made him forget the present company. He did
not even seem to be aware when they got up to take leave. He started
forwards, however, to hand Mrs. Shaw down to the carriage. As it drove
up, he and Margaret stood close together on the door-step, and it was
impossible but that the recollection of the day of the riot should force
itself into both their minds. Into his it came associated with the
speeches of the following day; her passionate declaration that there was
not a man in all that violent and a desperate crowd, for whom she did
not care as much as for him. And at the remembrance of her taunting
words, his brow grew stern, though his heart beat thick with longing
love. “No!” said he, “I put it to the touch once, and I lost it all. Let
her go,—with her stony heart, and her beauty;—how set and terrible her
look is now, for all her loveliness of feature! She is afraid I shall
speak what will require some stern repression. Let her go. Beauty and
heiress as she may be, she will find it hard to meet with a truer heart
than mine. Let her go!”

And there was no tone of regret, or emotion of any kind in the voice
with which he said good-bye; and the offered hand was taken with a
resolute calmness, and dropped as carelessly as if it had been a dead
and withered flower. But none in his household saw Mr. Thornton again
that day. He was busily engaged; or so he said.

Margaret’s strength was so utterly exhausted by these visits, that she
had to submit to much watching and petting, and sighing
“I-told-you-so’s,” from her aunt. Dixon said she was quite as bad as she
had been on the first day she heard of her father’s death; and she and
Mrs. Shaw consulted as to the desirableness of delaying the morrow’s
journey. But when her aunt reluctantly proposed a few days’ delay to
Margaret, the latter writhed her body as if in acute suffering, and
said:

“Oh! let us go. I cannot be patient here. I shall not get well here. I
want to forget.”

So the arrangements went on: and Captain Lennox came, and with him news
of Edith and the little boy; and Margaret found that the indifferent,
careless conversation of one who, however kind, was not too warm and
anxious a sympathiser, did her good. She roused up; and by the time that
she knew she might expect Higgins, she was able to leave the room
quietly, and await in her own chamber the expected summons.

“Eh!” said he, as she came in, “to think of th’ oud gentleman dropping
off as he did! Yo’ might ha’ knocked me down wi’ a straw when they
telled me. ‘Mr. Hale?’ said I; ‘him as was th’ parson?’ ‘Ay,’ said they.
‘Then,’ said I, ‘there’s as good a man gone as ever lived on this earth,
let who will be t’other!’ And I came to see yo’, and tell yo’ how
grieved I were, but them women in th’ kitchen wouldn’t tell yo’ I were
there. They said yo’ were ill,—and butter me, but yo’ dunnot look like
the same wench. And yo’re going to be a grand lady up i’ Lunnon, aren’t
yo’?”

“Not a grand lady,” said Margaret, half smiling.

“Well! Thornton said—says he, a day or two ago, ‘Higgins, have yo’ seen
Miss Hale?’ ‘No,’ says I; ‘there’s a pack o’ women who won’t let me at
her. But I can bide my time, if she’s ill. She and I knows each other
pretty well; and hoo’l not go doubting that I’m main sorry for th’ oud
gentleman’s death, just because I can’t get at her and tell her so.’ And
says he, ‘Yo’ll not have much time for to try and see her, my fine chap.
She’s not for staying with us a day longer nor she can help. She’s got
grand relations, and they’re carrying her off; and we shan’t see her no
more.’ ‘Measter,’ said I, ‘if I dunnot see her afore hoo goes, I’ll
strive to get up to Lunnon next Whitsuntide, that I will. I’ll not be
baulked of saying her good-bye by any relations whatsomdever. But bless
yo’, I knowed yo’d come. It were only for to humour the measter, I let
on as if I thought yo’d m’appen leave Milton without seeing me.”

“You’re quite right,” said Margaret. “You only do me justice. And you’ll
not forget me, I’m sure. If no one else in Milton remembers me, I’m
certain you will; and papa too. You know how good and tender he was.
Look, Higgins! here is his Bible. I have kept it for you. I can ill
spare it; but I know he would have liked you to have it. I’m sure you’ll
care for it, and study what is in it, for his sake.”

“Yo’ may say that. If it were the deuce’s own scribble, and yo’ axed me
to read in it for yo’r sake and the oud gentleman’s, I’d do it.
Whatten’s this, wench! I’m not going for to take yo’r brass, so dunnot
think it. We’ve been great friends, ’bout the sound o’ money passing
between us.”

“For the children—for Boucher’s children,” said Margaret, hurriedly.
“They may need it. You’ve no right to refuse it for them. I would not
give you one penny,” she said, smiling; “don’t think there’s any of it
for you.”

“Well, wench! I can nobbut say, Bless yo’! and bless yo’!—and amen.”




CHAPTER XLIV.

EASE NOT PEACE.

    “A dull rotation, never at a stay,
     Yesterday’s face twin image of to-day.”
                     COWPER.

    “Of what each one should be, he sees the form and rule,
     And till he reach to that, his joy can ne’er be full.”
                    RÜCKERT.


It was very well for Margaret that the extreme quiet of the Harley
Street house, during Edith’s recovery from her confinement, gave her the
natural rest which she needed. It gave her time to comprehend the sudden
change which had taken place in her circumstances within the last two
months. She found herself at once an inmate of a luxurious house, where
the bare knowledge of the existence of every trouble or care seemed
scarcely to have penetrated. The wheels of the machinery of daily life
were well oiled, and went along with delicious smoothness. Mrs. Shaw and
Edith could hardly make enough of Margaret, on her return to what they
persisted in calling her home. And she felt that it was almost
ungrateful in her to have a secret feeling that the Helstone
vicarage—nay, even the poor little house at Milton, with her anxious
father and her invalid mother, and all the small household cares of
comparative poverty, composed her idea of home. Edith was impatient to
get well, in order to fill Margaret’s bed-room with all the soft
comforts, and pretty knick-knacks, with which her own abounded. Mrs.
Shaw and her maid found plenty of occupation in restoring Margaret’s
wardrobe to a state of elegant variety. Captain Lennox was easy, kind,
and gentlemanly; sate with his wife in her dressing-room an hour or two
every day; played with his little boy for another hour, and lounged away
the rest of his time at his club, when he was not engaged out to
dinner. Just before Margaret had recovered from her necessity for quiet
and repose—before she had begun to feel her life wanting and
dull—Edith came downstairs and resumed her usual part in the household;
and Margaret fell into the old habit of watching, and admiring, and
ministering to her cousin. She gladly took all charge of the semblances
of duties off Edith’s hands; answered notes, reminded her of
engagements, tended her when no gaiety was in prospect, and she was
consequently rather inclined to fancy herself ill. But all the rest of
the family were in the full business of the London season, and Margaret
was often left alone. Then her thoughts went back to Milton, with a
strange sense of the contrast between the life there, and here. She was
getting surfeited of the eventless ease in which no struggle or
endeavour was required. She was afraid lest she should even become
sleepily deadened into forgetfulness of anything beyond the life which
was lapping her round with luxury. There might be toilers and moilers
there in London, but she never saw them; the very servants lived in an
underground world of their own, of which she knew neither the hopes nor
the fears; they only seemed to start into existence when some want or
whim of their master and mistress needed them. There was a strange
unsatisfied vacuum in Margaret’s heart and mode of life; and, once when
she had dimly hinted this to Edith, the latter, wearied with dancing the
night before, languidly stroked Margaret’s cheek as she sat by her in
the old attitude,—she on a footstool by the sofa where Edith lay.

“Poor child!” said Edith. “It is a little sad for you to be left, night
after night, just at this time when all the world is so gay. But we
shall be having our dinner-parties soon—as soon as Henry comes back
from circuit—and then there will be a little pleasant variety for you.
No wonder it is moped, poor darling!”

Margaret did not feel as if the dinner-parties would be a panacea. But
Edith piqued herself on her dinner-parties; “so different,” as she said,
“from the old dowager dinners under mamma’s _régime_”; and Mrs. Shaw
herself seemed to take exactly the same kind of pleasure in the very
different arrangements and circle of acquaintances which were to Captain
and Mrs. Lennox’s taste, as she did in the more formal and ponderous
entertainments which she herself used to give. Captain Lennox was always
extremely kind and brotherly to Margaret. She was really very fond of
him, excepting when he was anxiously attentive to Edith’s dress and
appearance, with a view to her beauty making a sufficient impression on
the world. Then all the latent Vashti in Margaret was roused, and she
could hardly keep herself from expressing her feelings.

The course of Margaret’s day was this: a quiet hour or two before a late
breakfast; an unpunctual meal, lazily eaten by weary and half-awake
people, but yet at which, in all its dragged out length, she was
expected to be present, because, directly afterwards, came a discussion
of plans, at which, although they none of them concerned her, she was
expected to give her sympathy, if she could not assist with her advice;
an endless number of notes to write, which Edith invariably left to
her, with many caressing compliments as to her _eloquence du billet_; a
little play with Sholto as he returned from his morning’s walk; besides
the care of the children during the servants’ dinner; a drive or
callers; and some dinner or morning engagement for her aunt and cousins,
which left Margaret free, it is true, but rather wearied with the
inactivity of the day, coming upon depressed spirits and delicate
health.

She looked forward with longing, though unspoken interest to the homely
object of Dixon’s return from Milton; where, until now, the old servant
had been busily engaged in winding up all the affairs of the Hale
family. It had appeared a sudden famine to her heart, this entire
cessation of any news respecting the people among whom she had lived so
long. It was true, that Dixon, in her business-like letters, quoted,
every now and then, an opinion of Mr. Thornton’s as to what she had
better do about the furniture, or how act in regard to the landlord of
the Crampton Terrace house. But it was only here and there that the name
came in, or any Milton name, indeed; and Margaret was sitting one
evening, all alone in the Lennox’s drawing-room, not reading Dixon’s
letters, which yet she held in her hand, but thinking over them, and
recalling the days which had been, and picturing the busy life out of
which her own had been taken and never missed; wondering if all went on
in that whirl just as if she and her father had never been; questioning
within herself, if no one in all the crowd missed her (not Higgins, she
was not thinking of him), when, suddenly Mr. Bell was announced; and
Margaret hurried the letters into her work-basket, and started up,
blushing as if she had been doing some guilty thing.

“Oh, Mr. Bell! I never thought of seeing you!”

“But you give me a welcome, I hope, as well as that very pretty start of
surprise.”

“Have you dined? How did you come? Let me order you some dinner.”

“If you’re going to have any. Otherwise, you know, there is no one who
cares less for eating than I do. But where are the others? Gone out to
dinner? Left you alone?”

“Oh yes! and it is such a rest. I was just thinking—But will you run
the risk of dinner? I don’t know if there is anything in the house.”

“Why, to tell you the truth, I dined at my club. Only they don’t cook as
well as they did, so I thought, if you were going to dine, I might try
and make out my dinner. But never mind, never mind! There aren’t ten
cooks in England to be trusted at impromptu dinners. If their skill and
their fires will stand it, their tempers won’t. You shall make me some
tea, Margaret. And now, what were you thinking of? you were going to
tell me. Whose letters were those, god-daughter, that you hid away so
speedily?”

“Only Dixon’s,” replied Margaret, growing very red.

“Whew! is that all? Who do you think came up in the train with me?”

“I don’t know,” said Margaret, resolved against making a guess.

“Your what d’ye call him? What’s the right name for a cousin-in-law’s
brother?”

“Mr. Henry Lennox?” asked Margaret.

“Yes,” replied Mr. Bell. “You knew him formerly, didn’t you? What sort
of a person is he, Margaret?”

“I liked him long ago,” said Margaret, glancing down for a moment. And
then she looked straight up and went on in her natural manner. “You know
we have been corresponding about Frederick since; but I have not seen
him for nearly three years, and he may be changed. What did you think of
him?”

“I don’t know. He was so busy trying to find out who I was, in the first
instance, and what I was in the second, that he never let out what he
was; unless indeed that veiled curiosity of his as to what manner of man
he had to talk to was not a good piece, and a fair indication of his
character. Do you call him good-looking, Margaret?”

“No! certainly not. Do you?”

“Not I. But I thought perhaps you might. Is he a great deal here?”

“I fancy he is when he is in town. He has been on circuit now since I
came. But—Mr. Bell—have you come from Oxford or from Milton?”

“From Milton. Don’t you see I’m smoke-dried?”

“Certainly. But I thought that it might be the effect of the antiquities
of Oxford.”

“Come now, be a sensible woman! In Oxford, I could have managed all the
landlords in the place, and had my own way, with half the trouble your
Milton landlord has given me, and defeated me after all. He won’t take
the house off our hands till next June twelve-month. Luckily, Mr.
Thornton found a tenant for it. Why don’t you ask after Mr. Thornton,
Margaret? He has proved himself a very active friend of yours, I can
tell you. Taken more than half the trouble off my hands.”

“And how is he? How is Mrs. Thornton?” asked Margaret hurriedly and
below her breath, though she tried to speak out.

“I suppose they’re well. I’ve been staying at their house till I was
driven out of it by the perpetual clack about that Thornton girl’s
marriage. It was too much for Thornton himself, though she was his
sister. He used to go and sit in his own room perpetually. He’s getting
past the age for caring for such things, either as principal or
accessory. I was surprised to find the old lady falling into the
current, and carried away by her daughter’s enthusiasm for
orange-blossoms and lace. I thought Mrs. Thornton had been made of
sterner stuff.”

“She would put on any assumption of feeling to veil her daughter’s
weakness,” said Margaret in a low voice.

“Perhaps so. You’ve studied her, have you? She doesn’t seem over fond of
you, Margaret.”

“I know it,” said Margaret. “Oh, here is tea, at last!” exclaimed she,
as if relieved. And with tea came Mr. Henry Lennox, who had walked up to
Harley Street after a late dinner, and had evidently expected to find
his brother and sister-in-law at home. Margaret suspected him of being
as thankful as she was at the presence of a third party, on this their
first meeting since the memorable day of his offer, and her refusal at
Helstone. She could hardly tell what to say at first, and was thankful
for all the tea-table occupations, which gave her an excuse for keeping
silence, and him an opportunity for recovering himself. For, to tell the
truth, he had rather forced himself up to Harley Street this evening,
with a view of getting over an awkward meeting, awkward even in the
presence of Captain Lennox and Edith, and doubly awkward now that he
found her the only lady there, and the person to whom he must naturally
and perforce address a great part of his conversation. She was the first
to recover her self-possession. She began to talk on the subject which
came uppermost in her mind, after the first flush of awkward shyness.

“Mr. Lennox, I have been so much obliged to you for all you have done
about Frederick.”

“I am only sorry it has been so unsuccessful,” replied he, with a quick
glance towards Mr. Bell, as if reconnoitring how much he might say
before him. Margaret, as if she read his thought, addressed herself to
Mr. Bell, both including him in the conversation, and implying that he
was perfectly aware of the endeavours that had been made to clear
Frederick.

“That Horrocks—that very last witness of all, has proved as unavailing
as all the others. Mr. Lennox has discovered that he sailed for
Australia only last August; only two months before Frederick was in
England, and gave us the names of——”

“Frederick in England! you never told me that!” exclaimed Mr. Bell in
surprise.

“I thought you knew. I never doubted you had been told. Of course, it
was a great secret, and perhaps I should not have named it now,” said
Margaret, a little dismayed.

“I have never named it to either my brother or your cousin,” said Mr.
Lennox, with a little professional dryness of implied reproach.

“Never mind, Margaret. I am not living in a talking, babbling world, nor
yet among people who are trying to worm facts out of me; you needn’t
look so frightened because you have let the cat out of the bag to a
faithful old hermit like me. I shall never name his having been in
England; I shall be out of temptation, for no one will ask me. Stay!”
(interrupting himself rather abruptly). “Was it at your mother’s
funeral?”

“He was with mamma when she died,” said Margaret, softly.

“To be sure! To be sure! Why, some one asked me if he had not been over
then, and I denied it stoutly—not many weeks ago—who could it have
been? Oh! I recollect!”

But he did not say the name; and although Margaret would have given much
to know if her suspicions were right, and it had been Mr. Thornton who
had made the enquiry, she could not ask the question of Mr. Bell, much
as she longed to do so.

There was a pause for a moment or two. Then Mr. Lennox said, addressing
himself to Margaret, “I suppose as Mr. Bell is now acquainted with all
the circumstances attending your brother’s unfortunate dilemma, I cannot
do better than inform him exactly how the research into the evidence we
once hoped to produce in his favour stands at present. So, if he will do
me the honour to breakfast with me to-morrow, we will go over the names
of these missing gentry.”

“I should like to hear all the particulars, if I may. Cannot you come
here? I dare not ask you both to breakfast, though I am sure you would
be welcome. But let me know all you can about Frederick, even though
there may be no hope at present.”

“I have an engagement at half-past eleven. But I will certainly come if
you wish it,” replied Mr. Lennox with a little after-thought of extreme
willingness, which made Margaret shrink into herself, and almost wish
that she had not proposed her natural request. Mr. Bell got up and
looked around him for his hat, which had been removed to make room for
tea.

“Well!” said he, “I don’t know what Mr. Lennox is inclined to do, but
I’m disposed to be moving off homewards. I’ve been a journey to-day, and
journeys begin to tell upon my sixty and odd years.”

“I believe I shall stay and see my brother and sister,” said Mr. Lennox,
making no movement of departure. Margaret was seized with a shy awkward
dread of being left alone with him. The scene on the little terrace in
the Helstone garden was so present to her, that she could hardly help
believing it was so with him.

“Don’t go yet, please Mr. Bell,” said she, hastily. “I want you to see
Edith; and I want Edith to know you. Please!” said she, laying a light
but determined hand on his arm. He looked at her, and saw the confusion
stirring in her countenance; he sate down again, as if her little touch
had been possessed of resistless strength.

“You see how she overpowers me, Mr. Lennox,” said he. “And I hope you
noticed the happy choice of her expressions; she wants me to ‘see’ this
cousin Edith, who, I am told, is a great beauty; but she has the honesty
to change her word when she comes to me—Mrs. Lennox is to ‘know’ me. I
suppose I am not much to ‘see,’ eh, Margaret?”

He joked, to give her time to recover from the slight flutter which he
had detected in her manner on his proposal to leave; and she caught the
tone, and threw the ball back. Mr. Lennox wondered how his brother, the
Captain, could have reported her as having lost all her good looks. To
be sure, in her quiet black dress, she was a contrast to Edith, dancing
in her white crape mourning, and long floating golden hair, all softness
and glitter. She dimpled and blushed most becomingly when introduced to
Mr. Bell, conscious that she had her reputation as a beauty to keep up,
and that it would not do to have a Mordecai refusing to worship and
admire, even in the shape of an old Fellow of a College, which nobody
had ever heard of. Mrs. Shaw and Captain Lennox, each in their separate
way, gave Mr. Bell a kind and sincere welcome, winning him over to like
them almost in spite of himself, especially when he saw how naturally
Margaret took her place as sister and daughter of the house.

“What a shame that we were not at home to receive you,” said Edith.
“You, too, Henry! though I don’t know that we should have stayed at home
for you. And for Mr. Bell! for Margaret’s Mr. Bell——”

“There is no knowing what sacrifices you would not have made,” said her
brother-in-law. “Even a dinner-party! and the delight of wearing this
very becoming dress.”

Edith did not know whether to frown or to smile, but it did not suit Mr.
Lennox to drive her to the first of these alternatives; so he went on.

“Will you show your readiness to make sacrifices to-morrow morning,
first by asking me to breakfast, to meet Mr. Bell, and secondly, by
being so kind as to order it at half-past nine, instead of at ten
o’clock? I have some letters and papers that I want to show to Miss Hale
and Mr. Bell.”

“I hope Mr. Bell will make our house his own during his stay in London,”
said Captain Lennox. “I am only so sorry we cannot offer him a bedroom.”

“Thank you. I am much obliged to you. You would only think me a churl if
you had, for I should decline it, I believe, in spite of all the
temptations of such agreeable company,” said Mr. Bell, bowing all round,
and secretly congratulating himself on the neat turn he had given to his
sentence, which, if put into plain language, would have been more to
this effect: “I couldn’t stand the restraints of such a proper-behaved
and civil-spoken people as these are: it would be like meat without
salt. I’m thankful they haven’t a bed. And how well I rounded my
sentence! I’m absolutely catching the trick of good manners.”

His self-satisfaction lasted him till he was fairly out in the streets,
walking side by side with Henry Lennox. Here he suddenly remembered
Margaret’s little look of entreaty as she urged him to stay longer, and
he also recollected a few hints given him long ago by an acquaintance of
Mr. Lennox’s, as to his admiration of Margaret. It gave a new direction
to his thoughts. “You have known Miss Hale for a long time, I believe.
How do you think her looking? She strikes me as pale and ill.”

“I thought her looking remarkably well. Perhaps not when I first
came—now I think of. But certainly, when she grew animated, she looked
as well as ever I saw her do.”

“She has had a great deal to go through,” said Mr. Bell.

“Yes! I have been sorry to hear of all she has had to bear; not merely
the common and universal sorrow arising from death, but all the
annoyance which her father’s conduct must have caused her, and then——”

“Her father’s conduct!” said Mr. Bell, in an accent of surprise. “You
must have heard some wrong statement. He behaved in the most
conscientious manner. He showed more resolute strength than I should
ever have given him credit for formerly.”

“Perhaps I have been wrongly informed. But I have been told, by his
successor in the living—a clever sensible man, and a thoroughly active
clergyman—that there was no call upon Mr. Hale to do what he did,
relinquish the living, and throw himself and his family on the tender
mercies of private teaching in a manufacturing town; the bishop had
offered him another living, it is true, but if he had come to entertain
certain doubts, he could have remained where he was, and so had no
occasion to resign. But the truth is, these country clergymen live such
isolated lives—isolated, I mean, from all intercourse with men of equal
cultivation with themselves, by whose minds they might regulate their
own, and discover when they were going either too fast or too slow—that
they are very apt to disturb themselves with imaginary doubts as to the
articles of faith, and throw up certain opportunities of doing good for
very uncertain fancies of their own.”

“I differ from you. I do not think they are very apt to do as my poor
friend Hale did.” Mr. Bell was inwardly chafing.

“Perhaps I used too general an expression in saying ‘very apt.’ But
certainly, their lives are such as very often to produce either
inordinate self-sufficiency, or a morbid state of conscience,” replied
Mr. Lennox with perfect coolness.

“You don’t meet with any self-sufficiency among the lawyers, for
instance?” asked Mr. Bell. “And seldom, I imagine, any cases of morbid
conscience.” He was becoming more and more vexed, and forgetting his
lately-caught trick of good manners. Mr. Lennox saw now that he had
annoyed his companion; and as he had talked pretty much for the sake of
saying something, and so passing the time away while their road lay
together, he was very indifferent as to the exact side he took upon the
question, and quietly came round by saying: “To be sure, there is
something fine in a man of Mr. Hale’s age leaving his home of twenty
years, and giving up all settled habits, for an idea which was probably
erroneous—but that does not matter—an untangible thought. One cannot
help admiring him, with a mixture of pity in one’s admiration, something
like what one feels for Don Quixote. Such a gentleman as he was too! I
shall never forget the refined and simple hospitality he showed to me
that last day at Helstone.”

Only half-mollified, and yet anxious, in order to lull certain qualms of
his own conscience, to believe that Mr. Hale’s conduct had a tinge of
Quixotism in it, Mr. Bell growled out—“Aye! And you don’t know Milton.
Such a change from Helstone! It is years since I have been at
Helstone—but I’ll answer for it, it is standing there yet—every stick
and every stone as it has done for the last century, while Milton! I go
there every four or five years—and I was born there—yet I do assure
you, I often lose my way—aye, among the very piles of warehouses that
are built upon my father’s orchard. Do we part here? Well, good-night,
sir; I suppose we shall meet in Harley Street to-morrow morning.”




CHAPTER XLV.

NOT ALL A DREAM.

    “Where are the sounds that swam along
    The buoyant air when I was young;
    The last vibration now is o’er,
    And they who listened are no more;
    Ah! let me close my eyes and dream.”
              W. S. LANDOR.


The idea of Helstone had been suggested to Mr. Bell’s waking mind by his
conversation with Mr. Lennox, and all night long it ran riot through his
dreams. He was again the tutor in the college where he now held the rank
of Fellow; it was again a long vacation, and he was staying with his
newly-married friend, the proud husband, and happy Vicar of Helstone.
Over babbling brooks they took impossible leaps, which seemed to keep
them whole days suspended in the air. Time and space were not, though
all other things seemed real. Every event was measured by the emotions
of the mind, not by its actual existence, for existence it had none. But
the trees were gorgeous in their autumnal leafiness—the warm odours of
flower and herb came sweet upon the sense—the young wife moved about
the house with just that mixture of annoyance at her position, as
regarded wealth, with pride in her handsome and devoted husband, which
Mr. Bell had noticed in real life a quarter of a century ago. The dream
was so like life that, when he awoke, his present life seemed a dream.
Where was he? In the close, handsomely furnished room of a London hotel!
Where were those who spoke to him, moved around him, touched him, not an
instant ago? Dead! buried! lost for evermore, as far as earth’s for
evermore would extend. He was an old man, so lately exultant in the full
strength of manhood. The utter loneliness of his life was insupportable
to think about. He got up hastily, and tried to forget what never more
might be, in a hurried dressing for the breakfast in Harley Street.

He could not attend to all the lawyer’s details, which, as he saw, made
Margaret’s eyes dilate, and her lips grow pale, as one by one fate
decreed, or so it seemed, every morsel of evidence which would exonerate
Frederick, should fall from beneath her feet and disappear. Even Mr.
Lennox’s well-regulated professional voice took a softer, tenderer tone,
as he drew near to the extinction of the last hope. It was not that
Margaret had not been perfectly aware of the result before. It was only
that the details of each successive disappointment came with such
relentless minuteness to quench all hope, that she at last fairly gave
way to tears. Mr. Lennox stopped reading.

“I had better not go on,” said he, in a concerned voice. “It was a
foolish proposal of mine. Lieutenant Hale,” and even this giving him the
title of the service from which he had so harshly been expelled, was
soothing to Margaret. “Lieutenant Hale is happy now; more secure in
fortune and future prospects than he could ever have been in the navy;
and has, doubtless, adopted his wife’s country as his own.”

“That is it,” said Margaret. “It seems so selfish in me to regret it,”
trying to smile, “and yet he is lost to me, and I am so lonely.” Mr.
Lennox turned over his papers, and wished that he were as rich and
prosperous as he believed he should be some day. Mr. Bell blew his nose,
but, otherwise, he also kept silence; and Margaret, in a minute or two,
had apparently recovered her usual composure. She thanked Mr. Lennox
very courteously for his trouble; all the more courteously and
graciously because she was conscious that, by her behaviour, he might
probably be led to imagine that he had given her needless pain. Yet it
was pain she would not have been without.

Mr. Bell came up to wish her good-bye.

“Margaret!” said he, as he fumbled with his gloves, “I am going down to
Helstone to-morrow, to look at the old place. Would you like to come
with me? Or would it give you too much pain? Speak out, don’t be
afraid.”

“Oh, Mr. Bell,” said she—and could say no more. But she took his old
gouty hand, and kissed it.

“Come, come; that’s enough,” said he, reddening with awkwardness. “I
suppose your aunt Shaw will trust you with me. We’ll go to-morrow
morning, and we shall get there about two o’clock, I fancy. We’ll take a
snack, and order dinner at the little inn—the Lennard Arms, it used to
be—and go and get an appetite in the forest. Can you stand it,
Margaret? It will be a trial, I know, to both of us, but it will be a
pleasure to me, at least. And there we’ll dine—it will be but
doe-venison, if we can get it at all—and then I’ll take my nap, while
you go out and see old friends. I’ll give you back safe and sound,
barring railway accidents, and I’ll insure your life for a thousand
pounds before starting, which may be some comfort to your relations; but
otherwise, I’ll bring you back to Mrs. Shaw by lunch time on Friday. So,
if you say yes, I’ll just go upstairs and propose it.”

“It’s no use my trying to say how much I shall like it,” said Margaret,
through her tears.

“Well, then, prove your gratitude by keeping those fountains of yours
dry for the next two days. If you don’t, I shall feel queer myself about
the lachrymal ducts, and I don’t like that.”

“I won’t cry a drop,” said Margaret, winking her eyes to shake the tears
off her eyelashes, and forcing a smile.

“There’s my good girl. Then we’ll go upstairs and settle it all.”
Margaret was in a state of almost trembling eagerness, while Mr. Bell
discussed his plan with her aunt Shaw, who was first startled, then
doubtful and perplexed, and in the end, yielding rather to the rough
force of Mr. Bell’s words than to her own conviction; for to the last,
whether it was right or wrong, proper or improper, she could not settle
to her own satisfaction, till Margaret’s safe return, the happy
fulfilment of the project, gave her decision enough to say, “she was
sure it had been a very kind thought of Mr. Bell’s, and just what she
herself had been wishing for Margaret, as giving her the very change
which she required, after all the anxious time she had had.”




CHAPTER XLVI.

ONCE AND NOW.

    “So on those happy days of yore
    Oft as I dare to dwell once more,
    Still must I miss the friends so tried,
    Whom Death has severed from my side.

    But ever when true friendship binds,
    Spirit it is that spirit finds;
    In spirit then our bliss we found,
    In spirit yet to them I’m bound.”
              UHLAND.


Margaret was ready long before the appointed time, and had leisure
enough to cry a little, quietly, when unobserved, and to smile brightly
when any one looked at her. Her last alarm was lest they should be too
late and miss the train; but no! they were all in time; and she breathed
freely and happily at length, seated in the carriage opposite to Mr.
Bell, and whirling away past the well-known stations; seeing the old
south country-towns and hamlets sleeping in the warm light of the pure
sun, which gave a yet ruddier colour to their tiled roofs, so different
to the cold slates of the north. Broods of pigeons hovered around these
peaked quaint gables, slowly settling here and there, and ruffling their
soft, shiny feathers, as if exposing every fibre to the delicious
warmth. There were few people about at the stations, it almost seemed as
if they were too lazily content to wish to travel; none of the bustle
and stir that Margaret had noticed in her two journeys on the London and
North-Western line. Later on in the year, this line of railway should be
stirring and alive with rich pleasure-seekers; but as to the constant
going to and fro of busy tradespeople it would always be widely
different from the northern lines. Here a spectator or two stood
lounging at nearly every station, with his hands in his pockets, so
absorbed in the simple act of watching, that it made the travellers
wonder what he could find to do when the train whirled away, and only
the blank of a railway, some sheds, and a distant field or two were left
for him to gaze upon. The hot air danced over the golden stillness of
the land, farm after farm was left behind, each reminding Margaret of
German Idylls—of Herman and Dorothea—of Evangeline. From this waking
dream she was roused. It was the place to leave the train and take the
fly to Helstone. And now sharper feelings came shooting through her
heart, whether pain or pleasure she could hardly tell. Every mile was
redolent of associations, which she would not have missed for the
world, but each of which made her cry upon “the days that are no more,”
with ineffable longing. The last time she had passed along this road was
when she had left it with her father and mother—the day, the season,
had been gloomy, and she herself hopeless, but they were there with her.
Now she was alone, an orphan, and they, strangely, had gone away from
her, and vanished from the face of the earth. It hurt her to see the
Helstone road so flooded in the sunlight, and every turn and every
familiar tree so precisely the same in its summer glory as it had been
in former years. Nature felt no change and was ever young.

Mr. Bell knew something of what would be passing through her mind, and
wisely and kindly held his tongue. They drove up to the Lennard Arms;
half farm-house, half-inn, standing a little apart from the road, as
much as to say, that the host did not so depend on the custom of
travellers, as to have to court it by any obtrusiveness; they, rather,
must seek him out. The house fronted the village green; and right before
it stood an immemorial lime-tree benched all round, in some hidden
recesses of whose leafy wealth hung the grim escutcheon of the Lennards.
The door of the inn stood wide open, but there was no hospitable hurry
to receive the travellers. When the landlady did appear—and they might
have abstracted many an article first—she gave them a kind welcome,
almost as if they had been invited guests, and apologised for her coming
having been so delayed, by saying, that it was hay-time, and the
provisions for the men had to be sent a-field, and she had been too busy
packing up the baskets to hear the noise of wheels over the road, which,
since they left the highway, ran over soft short turf.

“Why, bless me!” exclaimed she, as at the end of her apology a glint of
sunshine showed her Margaret’s face, hitherto unobserved in that shady
parlour. “It’s Miss Hale, Jenny,” said she, running to the door, and
calling to her daughter. “Come here, come directly, it’s Miss Hale!” And
then she went up to Margaret, and shook hands with motherly fondness.

“And how are you all? How’s the Vicar and Miss Dixon? The Vicar above
all! God bless him! We’ve never ceased to be sorry that he left.”

Margaret tried to speak and tell her of her father’s death; of her
mother’s it was evident that Mrs. Purkis was aware, from her omission of
her name. But she choked in the effort, and could only touch her deep
mourning, and say the one word, “Papa.”

“Surely, sir, it’s never so!” said Mrs. Purkis, turning to Mr. Bell for
confirmation of the sad suspicion that now entered her mind. “There was
a gentleman here in the spring—might have been as long ago as last
winter—who told us a deal of Mr. Hale and Miss Margaret; and he said
Mrs. Hale was gone, poor lady. But never a word of the Vicar’s being
ailing!”

“It is so, however,” said Mr. Bell. “He died quite suddenly, when on a
visit to me at Oxford. He was a good man, Mrs. Purkis, and there’s many
of us that might be thankful to have as calm an end as his. Come,
Margaret, my dear! Her father was my oldest friend, and she’s my
god-daughter, so I thought we would just come down together and see the
old place; and I know of old you can give us comfortable rooms and a
capital dinner. You don’t remember me I see, but my name is Bell, and
once or twice when the parsonage has been full, I’ve slept here, and
tasted your good ale.”

“To be sure; I ask your pardon; but you see I was taken up with Miss
Hale. Let me show you to a room, Miss Margaret, where you can take off
your bonnet, and wash your face. It’s only this very morning I plunged
some fresh-gathered roses head downward in the water-jug, for thought I,
perhaps some one will be coming, and there’s nothing so sweet as
spring-water scented by a musk rose or two. To think of the Vicar being
dead! Well, to be sure, we must all die; only that gentleman said, he
was quite picking up after his trouble about Mrs. Hale’s death.”

“Come down to me, Mrs. Purkis, after you have attended to Miss Hale. I
want to have a consultation with you about dinner.”

The little casement window in Margaret’s bed-chamber was almost filled
up with rose and vine branches; but, pushing them aside, and stretching
a little out, she could see the tops of the parsonage chimneys above the
trees, and distinguish many a well-known line through the leaves.

“Aye!” said Mrs. Purkis, smoothing down the bed, and despatching Jenny
for an armful of lavender-scented towels, “times is changed, miss; our
new Vicar has seven children, and is building a nursery ready for more,
just where the arbour and tool-house used to be in old times. And he has
had new grates put in, and a plate-glass window in the drawing-room. He
and his wife are stirring people, and have done a deal of good; at least
they say it’s doing good; if it were not, I should call it turning
things upside down for very little purpose. The new Vicar is a
teetotaller, miss, and a magistrate, and his wife has a deal of receipts
for economical cooking, and is for making bread without yeast; and they
both talk so much, and both at a time, that they knock one down as it
were, and it’s not till they’re gone, and one’s a little at peace, that
one can think that there were things one might have said on one’s own
side of the question. He’ll be after the men’s cans in the hay-field,
and peeping in; and then there’ll be an ado because it’s not
ginger-beer, but I can’t help it. My mother and my grandmother before me
sent good malt liquor to hay-makers, and took salts and senna when
anything ailed them; and I must e’en go on in their ways, though Mrs.
Hepworth does want to give me comfits instead of medicine, which, as she
says, is a deal pleasanter, only I’ve no faith in it. But I must go,
miss, though I’m wanting to hear many a thing; I’ll come back to you
before long.”

Mr. Bell had strawberries and cream, a loaf of brown bread, and a jug of
milk (together with a Stilton cheese and a bottle of port for his own
private refreshment), ready for Margaret on her coming down stairs; and
after this rustic luncheon they set out for a walk, hardly knowing in
what direction to turn, so many old familiar inducements were there in
each.

“Shall we go past the vicarage?” asked Mr. Bell.

“No, not yet. We will go this way, and make a round so as to come back
by it,” said Margaret.

Here and there old trees had been felled the autumn before; or a
squatter’s cottage roughly-built and decaying cottage had disappeared.
Margaret missed them each and all, and grieved over them like old
friends. They came past the spot where she and Mr. Lennox had sketched.
The white, lightning-scarred trunk of the venerable beech, among whose
roots they had sate down was there no more; the old man, the inhabitant
of the ruinous cottage, was dead; the cottage had been pulled down, and
a new one, tidy and respectable, had been built in its stead. There was
a small garden on the place where the beech-tree had been.

“I did not think I had been so old,” said Margaret after a pause of
silence; and she turned away sighing.

“Yes!” said Mr. Bell. “It is the first changes among familiar things
that make such a mystery of time to the young, afterwards we lose the
sense of the mysterious. I take changes in all I see as a matter of
course. The instability of all human things is familiar to me, to you it
is new and oppressive.”

“Let us go on to see little Susan,” said Margaret, drawing her companion
up a grassy road-way, leading under the shadow of a forest glade.

“With all my heart, though I have not an idea who little Susan may be.
But I have a kindness for all Susans, for simple Susan’s sake.”

“My little Susan was disappointed when I left without wishing her
good-bye; and it has been on my conscience ever since, that I gave her
pain which a little more exertion on my part might have prevented. But
it is a long way. Are you sure you will not be tired?”

“Quite sure. That is, if you don’t walk so fast. You see, here there are
no views that can give one an excuse for stopping to take breath. You
would think it romantic to be walking with a person ‘fat and scant o’
breath’ if I were Hamlet, Prince of Denmark. Have compassion on my
infirmities for his sake.”

“I will walk slower for your own sake. I like you twenty times better
than Hamlet.”

“On the principle that a living ass is better than a dead lion?”

“Perhaps so. I don’t analyse my feelings.”

“I am content to take your liking me, without examining too curiously
into the materials it is made of. Only we need not walk at a snail’s
pace.”

“Very well. Walk at your own pace, and I will follow. Or stop still and
meditate, like the Hamlet you compare yourself to, if I go too fast.”

“Thank you. But as my mother has not murdered my father, and afterwards
married my uncle, I shouldn’t know what to think about, unless it were
balancing the chances of our having a well-cooked dinner or not. What do
you think?”

“I am in good hopes. She used to be considered a famous cook as far as
Helstone opinion went.”

“But have you considered the distraction of mind produced by all this
haymaking?”

Margaret felt all Mr. Bell’s kindness in trying to make cheerful talk
about nothing, to endeavour to prevent her from thinking too curiously
about the past. But she would rather have gone over these dear-loved
walks in silence, if indeed she were not ungrateful enough to wish that
she might have been alone.

They reached the cottage where Susan’s widowed mother lived. Susan was
not there. She was gone to the parochial school. Margaret was
disappointed, and the poor woman saw it, and began to make a kind of
apology.

“Oh! it is quite right,” said Margaret. “I am very glad to hear it. I
might have thought of it. Only she used to stop at home with you.”

“Yes, she did; and I miss her sadly. I used to teach her what little I
knew at nights. It were not much to be sure. But she were getting such a
handy girl, that I miss her sore. But she’s a deal above me in learning
now.” And the mother sighed.

“I’m all wrong,” growled Mr. Bell. “Don’t mind what I say. I’m a hundred
years behind the world. But I should say, that the child was getting a
better and simpler, and more natural education stopping at home, and
helping her mother, and learning to read a chapter in the New Testament
every night by her side, than from all the schooling under the sun.”

Margaret did not want to encourage him to go on by replying to him, and
so prolonging the discussion before the mother. So she turned to her and
asked,

“How is old Betty Barnes?”

“I don’t know,” said the woman rather shortly. “We’se not friends.”

“Why not?” asked Margaret, who had formerly been the peace-maker of the
village.

“She stole my cat.”

“Did she know it was yours?”

“I don’t know. I reckon not.”

“Well! could not you get it back again when you told her it was yours?”

“No! for she’d burnt it.”

“Burnt it!” exclaimed both Margaret and Mr. Bell.

“Roasted it!” explained the woman.

It was no explanation. By dint of questioning, Margaret extracted from
her the horrible fact that Betty Barnes, having been induced by a gipsy
fortune-teller to lend the latter her husband’s Sunday clothes, on
promise of having them faithfully returned on the Saturday night before
Goodman Barnes should have missed them, became alarmed by their
non-appearance, and her consequent dread of her husband’s anger, and
as, according to one of the savage country superstitions, the cries of a
cat, in the agonies of being boiled or roasted alive; compelled (as it
were) the powers of darkness to fulfil the wishes of the executioner,
resort had been had to the charm. The poor woman evidently believed in
its efficacy; her only feeling was indignation that her cat had been
chosen out from all others for a sacrifice. Margaret listened in horror;
and endeavoured in vain to enlighten the woman’s mind; but she was
obliged to give it up in despair. Step by step she got the woman to
admit certain facts, of which the logical connexion and sequence was
perfectly clear to Margaret; but at the end, the bewildered woman simply
repeated her first assertion, namely, that “it were very cruel for sure,
and she should not like to do it; but that there was nothing like it for
giving a person what they wished for; she had heard it all her life; but
it were very cruel for all that.” Margaret gave it up in despair, and
walked away sick at heart.

“You are a good girl not to triumph over me,” said Mr. Bell.

“How? What do you mean?”

“I own I am wrong about schooling. Anything rather than have that child
brought up in such practical paganism.”

“Oh! I remember. Poor little Susan! I must go and see her; would you
mind calling at the school?”

“Not a bit. I am curious to see something of the teaching she is to
receive.”

They did not speak much more, but thridded their way through many a
bosky dell, whose soft green influence could not charm away the shock
and the pain in Margaret’s heart, caused by the recital of such cruelty;
a recital too, the manner of which betrayed such utter want of
imagination, and therefore of any sympathy with the suffering animal.

The buzz of voices, like the murmur of a hive of busy human bees, made
itself heard as soon as they emerged from the forest on the more open
village-green on which the school was situated. The door was wide open,
and they entered. A brisk lady in black, here, there, and everywhere,
perceived them, and bade them welcome with somewhat of the hostess-air
which, Margaret remembered, her mother was wont to assume, only in a
more soft and languid manner, when any rare visitors strayed in to
inspect the school. She knew at once it was the present Vicar’s wife,
her mother’s successor; and she would have drawn back from the interview
had it been possible; but in an instant she had conquered this feeling,
and modestly advanced, meeting many a bright glance of recognition, and
hearing many a half-suppressed murmur of “It’s Miss Hale.” The Vicar’s
lady heard the name, and her manner at once became more kindly. Margaret
wished she could have helped feeling that it also became more
patronizing. The lady held out a hand to Mr. Bell, with,—

“Your father, I presume, Miss Hale. I see it by the likeness. I am sure
I am very glad to see you, sir, and so will the Vicar be.”

Margaret explained that it was not her father, and stammered out the
fact of his death; wondering all the time how Mr. Hale could have borne
coming to revisit Helstone, if it had been as the Vicar’s lady supposed.
She did not hear what Mrs. Hepworth was saying, and left it to Mr. Bell
to reply, looking round, meanwhile, for her old acquaintances.

“Ah! I see you would like to take a class, Miss Hale. I know it by
myself. First class stand up for a parsing lesson with Miss Hale.”

Poor Margaret, whose visit was sentimental, not in any degree
inspective, felt herself taken in; but as in some way bringing her in
contact with little eager faces, once well-known, and who had received
the solemn rite of baptism from her father, she sate down, half losing
herself in tracing out the changing features of the girls, and holding
Susan’s hand for a minute or two, unobserved by all, while the first
class sought for their books, and the Vicar’s lady went as near as a
lady could towards holding Mr. Bell by the button, while she explained
the Phonetic system to him, and gave him a conversation she had had with
the Inspector about it.

Margaret bent over her book, and seeing nothing but that—hearing the
buzz of children’s voices, old times rose up, and she thought of them,
and her eyes filled with tears, till all at once there was a pause—one
of the girls was stumbling over the apparently simple word “a,”
uncertain what to call it.

“A, an indefinite article,” said Margaret, mildly.

“I beg your pardon,” said the Vicar’s wife, all eyes and ears; “but we
are taught by Mr. Milsome to call ‘a’ an—who can remember?”

“An adjective absolute,” said half-a-dozen voices at once. And Margaret
sate abashed. The children knew more than she did. Mr. Bell turned away,
and smiled.

Margaret spoke no more during the lesson. But after it was over, she
went quietly round to one or two old favourites, and talked to them a
little. They were growing out of children into great girls; passing out
of their recollection in their rapid development, as she, by her three
year’s absence, was vanishing from theirs. Still she was glad to have
seen them all again, though a tinge of sadness mixed itself with her
pleasure. When school was over for the day, it was yet early in the
summer afternoon; and Mrs. Hepworth proposed to Margaret that she and
Mr. Bell should accompany her to the parsonage, and see—the word
“improvements” had half slipped out of her mouth, but she substituted
the more cautious term “alterations” which the present Vicar was making.
Margaret did not care a straw about seeing the alterations, which jarred
upon her fond recollection of what her home had been; but she longed to
see the old place once more, even though she shivered away from the pain
which she knew she should feel.

The parsonage was so altered, both inside and out, that the real pain
was less than she anticipated. It was not like the same place. The
garden, the grass-plat, formerly so daintily trim that even a stray
rose-leaf seemed like a fleck on the exquisite arrangement and
propriety, was strewed with children’s things; a bag of marbles here, a
hoop there; a straw-hat forced down upon a rose-tree as on a peg, to the
destruction of a long beautiful tender branch laden with flowers, which
in former days would have been trained up tenderly, as if beloved. The
little square matted hall was equally filled with signs of merry healthy
rough childhood.

“Ah!” said Mrs. Hepworth, “you must excuse this untidiness, Miss Hale.
When the nursery is finished, I shall insist upon a little order. We are
building a nursery out of your room, I believe. How did you manage, Miss
Hale, without a nursery?”

“We were but two,” said Margaret. “You have many children, I presume?”

“Seven. Look here! we are throwing out a window to the road on this
side. Mr. Hepworth is spending an immense deal of money on this house;
but really it was scarcely habitable when we came—for so large a family
as ours I mean, of course.” Every room in the house was changed, besides
the one of which Mrs. Hepworth spoke, which had been Mr. Hale’s study
formerly; and where the green gloom and delicious quiet of the place had
conduced, as he had said, to a habit of meditation, but, perhaps, in
some degree to the formation of a character more fitted for thought than
action. The new window gave a view of the road, and had many advantages,
as Mrs. Hepworth pointed out. From it the wandering sheep of her
husband’s flock might be seen, who straggled to the tempting beer-house,
unobserved as they might hope, but not unobserved in reality; for the
active Vicar kept his eye on the road, even during the composition of
his most orthodox sermons, and had a hat and stick hanging ready at hand
to seize, before sallying out after his parishioners, who had need of
quick legs if they could take refuge in the “Jolly Forester” before the
teetotal Vicar had arrested them. The whole family were quick, brisk,
loud-talking, kind-hearted, and not troubled with much delicacy of
perception. Margaret feared that Mrs. Hepworth would find out that Mr.
Bell was playing upon her, in the admiration he thought fit to express
for everything that especially grated on his taste. But no! she took it
all literally, and with such good faith, that Margaret could not help
remonstrating with him as they walked slowly away from the parsonage
back to their inn.

“Don’t scold, Margaret. It was all because of you. If she had not shown
you every change with such evident exultation in their superior sense,
in perceiving what an improvement this and that would be, I could have
behaved well. But if you must go on preaching, keep it till after
dinner, when it will send me to sleep, and help my digestion.”

They were both of them tired, and Margaret herself so much so, that she
was unwilling to go out as she had proposed to do, and have another
ramble among the woods and fields so close to the home of her childhood.
And, somehow, this visit to Helstone had not been all—had not been
exactly what she had expected. There was change everywhere; slight, yet
pervading all. Households were changed by absence, or death, or
marriage, or the natural mutations brought by days and months and
years, which carry us on imperceptibly from childhood to youth, and
thence through manhood to age, whence we drop like fruit, fully ripe,
into the quiet mother earth. Places were changed—a tree gone here, a
bough there, bringing in a long ray of light where no light was
before—a road was trimmed and narrowed, and the green straggling
pathway by its side enclosed and cultivated. A great improvement it was
called; but Margaret sighed over the old picturesqueness, the old gloom,
and the grassy way-side of former days. She sate by the window on the
little settle, sadly gazing out upon the gathering shades of night,
which harmonized well with her pensive thought. Mr. Bell slept soundly,
after his unusual exercise through the day. At last he was roused by the
entrance of the tea-tray, brought in by a flushed-looking country-girl,
who had evidently been finding some variety from her usual occupation of
waiter, in assisting this day in the hay-field.

“Hallo! Who’s there! Where are we? Who’s that,—Margaret? Oh, now I
remember all. I could not imagine what woman was sitting there in such a
doleful attitude, with her hands clasped straight out upon her knees,
and her face looking so steadfastly before her. What are you looking
at?” asked Mr. Bell, coming to the window, and standing behind Margaret.

“Nothing,” said she, rising up quickly, and speaking as cheerfully as
she could at a moment’s notice.

“Nothing indeed! A bleak back-ground of trees, some white linen hung out
on the sweet-briar hedge, and a great waft of damp air. Shut the window,
and come in and make tea.”

Margaret was silent for some time. She played with her teaspoon, and did
not attend particularly to what Mr. Bell said. He contradicted her, and
she took the same sort of smiling notice of his opinion as if he had
agreed with her. Then she sighed, and putting down her spoon, she began,
apropos of nothing at all, and in the high-pitched voice which usually
shows that the speaker has been thinking for some time on the subject
that they wish to introduce—“Mr. Bell, you remember what we were saying
about Frederick last night, don’t you?”

“Last night. Where was I? Oh, I remember! Why, it seems a week ago. Yes,
to be sure, I recollect we talked about him, poor fellow.”

“Yes—and do you remember that Mr. Lennox spoke about his having been in
England about the time of dear mamma’s death?” asked Margaret, her voice
now lower than usual.

“I recollect. I hadn’t heard of it before.”

“And I thought—I always thought that papa had told you about it.”

“No! he never did. But what about it, Margaret?”

“I want to tell you of something I did that was very wrong, about that
time,” said Margaret, suddenly looking up at him with her clear honest
eyes. “I told a lie!” and her face became scarlet.

“True, that was bad I own; not but what I have told a pretty round
number in my life, not all in downright words, as I suppose you did, but
in actions, or in some shabby circumlocutory way, leading people either
to disbelieve the truth, or believe a falsehood. You know who is the
father of lies, Margaret? Well! a great number of folk, thinking
themselves very good, have odd sorts of connexion with lies, left-hand
marriages, and second-cousins-once-removed. The tainting blood of
falsehood runs through us all. I should have guessed you as far from it
as most people. What! crying, child? Nay, now we’ll not talk of it, if
it ends in this way. I dare say you have been sorry for it, and that you
won’t do it again, and it’s long ago now, and in short I want you to be
very cheerful, and not very sad, this evening.”

Margaret wiped her eyes, and tried to talk about something else, but
suddenly she burst out afresh.

“Please, Mr. Bell, let me tell you about it—you could perhaps help me a
little; no, not help me, but if you knew the truth, perhaps you could
put me to rights—that is not it, after all,” said she, in despair at
not being able to express herself more exactly as she wished.

Mr. Bell’s whole manner changed. “Tell me all about it, child,” said he.

“It’s a long story; but when Fred came, mamma was very ill, and I was
undone with anxiety, and afraid, too, that I might have drawn him into
danger; and we had an alarm just after her death, for Dixon met some one
in Milton—a man called Leonards—who had known Fred, and who seemed to
owe him a grudge, or at any rate to be tempted by the recollection of
the reward offered for his apprehension; and with this new fright, I
thought I had better hurry off Fred to London, where, as you would
understand from what we said the other night, he was to go to consult
Mr. Lennox as to his chances if he stood trial. So we—that is, he and
I,—went to the railway station; it was one evening, and it was just
getting rather dusk, but still light enough to recognize and be
recognized, and we were too early, and went out to walk in a field just
close by; I was always in a panic about this Leonards, who was, I knew,
somewhere in the neighbourhood; and then, when we were in the field, the
low red sunlight just in my face, some one came by on horseback in the
road just below the field-style on which we stood.—I saw him look at
me, but I did not know who it was at first, the sun was so in my eyes,
but in an instant the dazzle went off, and I saw it was Mr. Thornton,
and we bowed”——

“And he saw Frederick of course,” said Mr. Bell, helping her on with her
story, as he thought.

“Yes; and then at the station a man came up—tipsy and reeling—and he
tried to collar Fred, and over-balanced himself as Fred wrenched himself
away, and fell over the hedge of the platform; not far, not deep; not
above three feet; but oh! Mr. Bell, somehow that fall killed him!”

“How awkward. It was this Leonards, I suppose. And how did Fred get
off?”

“Oh! he went off immediately after the fall, which we never thought
could have done the poor fellow any harm, it seemed so slight an
injury.”

“Then he did not die directly?”

“No! not for two or three days. And then—oh, Mr. Bell! now comes the
bad part,” said she, nervously twining her fingers together. “A police
inspector came and taxed me with having been a companion of the young
man, whose push or blow had occasioned Leonards’ death; that was a false
accusation, you know, but we had not heard that Fred had sailed, he
might still be in London and liable to be arrested on this false charge,
and his identity with the Lieutenant Hale, accused of causing the
mutiny, discovered, he might be shot; all this flashed through my mind,
and I said it was not me. I was not at the railway station that night. I
knew nothing about it. I had no conscience or thought but to save
Frederick.”

“I say it was right. I should have done the same. You forgot yourself in
thought for another. I hope I should have done the same.”

“No, you would not. It was wrong, disobedient, faithless. At that very
time Fred was safely out of England, and in my blindness I forgot that
there was another witness who could testify to my being there.”

“Who?”

“Mr. Thornton. You know he had seen me close to the station; we had
bowed to each other.”

“Well! he would know nothing of this riot, about the drunken fellow’s
death. I suppose the injury never came to anything.”

“No! the proceedings they had begun to talk about on the inquest were
stopped. Mr. Thornton did know all about it. He was a magistrate, and he
found out that it was not the fall that had caused the death. But not
before he knew what I had said. Oh, Mr. Bell!” She suddenly covered her
face with her hands, as if wishing to hide herself from the presence of
the recollection.

“Did you have any explanation with him? Did you ever tell him the
strong, instinctive motive?”

“The instinctive want of faith, and clutching at a sin to keep myself
from sinking,” said she bitterly. “No! How could I? He knew nothing of
Frederick. To put myself to rights in his good opinion, was I to tell
him the secrets of our family, involving, as they seemed to do, the
chances of poor Frederick’s entire exculpation? Fred’s last words had
been to enjoin me to keep his visit a secret from all. You see, papa
never told, even you. No! I could bear the shame—I thought I could at
least. I did bear it. Mr. Thornton has never respected me since.”

“He respects you, I am sure,” said Mr. Bell. “To be sure it accounts a
little for——. But he always speaks of you with regard and esteem,
though now I understand certain reservations in his manner.”

Margaret did not speak; did not attend to what Mr. Bell had to say; lost
all sense of it. By-and-by she said:

“Will you tell me what you refer to about ‘reservations’ in his manner
of speaking to me?”

“Oh! simply he has annoyed me by not joining in my praises of you. Like
an old fool, I thought that every one would have the same opinion as I
had; and he evidently could not agree with me. I was puzzled at the
time. But he must be perplexed, if the affair has never been in the
least explained. There was first your walking out with a young man in
the dark——”

“But it was my brother!” said Margaret, surprised.

“True. But how was he to know that?”

“I don’t know. I never thought anything of that kind,” said Margaret,
reddening, and looking hurt and offended.

“And perhaps he never would, but for the lie,—which, under the
circumstances, I maintain, was necessary.”

“It was not. I know it now. I bitterly repent it.”

There was a long pause of silence. Margaret was the first to speak.

“I am not likely ever to see Mr. Thornton again,”—and there she
stopped.

“There are many things more unlikely, I should say,” replied Mr. Bell.

“But I believe I never shall. Still, somehow one does not like to have
sunk so low in—in a friend’s opinion as I have done in his.” Her eyes
were full of tears, but her voice was steady, and Mr. Bell was not
looking at her. “And now that Frederick has given up all hope, and
almost all wish of ever clearing himself, and returning to England, it
would be only doing myself justice to have all this explained. If you
please, and if you can, if there is a good opportunity, (don’t force an
explanation upon him, pray,) but if you can, will you tell him the whole
circumstances, and tell him also that I gave you leave to do so, because
I felt that for poor papa’s sake I should not like to lose his respect,
though we may never be likely to meet again?”

“Certainly. I think he ought to know. I do not like you to rest even
under a shadow of an impropriety; he would not know what to think of
seeing you alone with a young man.”

“As for that,” said Margaret, rather haughtily, “I hold it is ‘Honi soit
qui mal y pense,’ Yet still I should choose to have it explained, if any
natural opportunity for easy explanation occurs. But it is not to clear
myself of any suspicion of improper conduct that I wish to have him
told—if I thought that he had suspected me, I should not care for his
good opinion—no! it is that he may learn how I was tempted, and how I
fell into the snare; why I told that falsehood, in short.”

“Which I don’t blame you for. It is no partiality of mine, I assure
you.”

“What other people may think of the rightness or wrongness is nothing in
comparison to my own deep knowledge, my innate conviction that it was
wrong. But we will not talk of that any more, if you please. It is
done—my sin is sinned. I have now to put it behind me, and be truthful
for evermore, if I can.”

“Very well. If you like to be uncomfortable and morbid, be so. I always
keep my conscience as tight shut up as a jack-in-a-box, for when it
jumps into existence it surprises me by its size. So I coax it down
again, as the fisherman coaxed the genii. ‘Wonderful,’ says I, ‘to think
that you have been concealed so long, and in so small a compass, that I
really did not know of your existence. Pray, sir, instead of growing
larger and larger every instant, and bewildering me with your misty
outlines, would you once more compress yourself into your former
dimensions?’ And when I’ve got him down, don’t I clap the seal on the
vase, and take good care how I open it again, and how I go against
Solomon, wisest of men, who confined him there.”

But it was no smiling matter to Margaret. She hardly attended to what
Mr. Bell was saying. Her thoughts ran upon the idea, before entertained,
but which now had assumed the strength of a conviction, that Mr.
Thornton no longer held his former good opinion of her—that he was
disappointed in her. She did not feel as if any explanation could ever
reinstate her—not in his love, for that and any return on her part she
had resolved never to dwell upon, and she kept rigidly to her
resolution—but in the respect and high regard which she had hoped would
have ever made him willing, in the spirit of Gerald Griffin’s beautiful
lines,

    “To turn and look back when thou hearest
    The sound of my name.”

She kept choking and swallowing all the time that she thought about it.
She tried to comfort herself with the idea, that what he imagined her to
be, did not alter the fact of what she was. But it was a truism, a
phantom, and broke down under the weight of her regret. She had twenty
questions on the tip of her tongue to ask Mr. Bell, but not one of them
did she utter. Mr. Bell thought that she was tired, and sent her early
to her room, where she sate long hours by the open window, gazing out on
the purple dome above, where the stars arose, and twinkled and
disappeared behind the great umbrageous trees before she went to bed.
All night long too, there burnt a little light on earth; a candle in her
old bedroom, which was the nursery with the present inhabitants of the
parsonage, until the new one was built. A sense of change, of individual
nothingness, of perplexity and disappointment, overpowered Margaret.
Nothing had been the same; and this slight, all-pervading instability,
had given her greater pain than if all had been too entirely changed for
her to recognise it.

“I begin to understand now what heaven must be—and, oh! the grandeur
and repose of the words—‘The same yesterday, to-day, and for ever.’
Everlasting! ‘From everlasting to everlasting, Thou art God.’ That
beautiful sky above me looks as though it could not change, and yet it
will. I am so tired—so tired of being whirled on through all these
phases of my life, in which nothing abides by me, no creature, no place;
it is like the circle in which the victims of earthly passion eddy
continually. I am in the mood in which women of another religion take
the veil. I seek heavenly steadfastness in earthly monotony. If I were a
Roman Catholic and could deaden my heart, stun it with some great blow,
I might become a nun. But I should pine after my kind; no, not my kind,
for love for my species could never fill my heart to the utter exclusion
of love for individuals. Perhaps it ought to be so, perhaps not; I
cannot decide to-night.”

Wearily she went to bed, wearily she arose in four or five hours’ time.
But with the morning came hope, and a brighter view of things.

“After all it is right,” said she, hearing the voices of children at
play while she was dressing. “If the world stood still, it would
retrograde and become corrupt, if that is not Irish. Looking out of
myself and my own painful sense of change, the progress of all around me
is right and necessary. I must not think so much of how circumstances
affect me myself, but how they affect others, if I wish to have a right
judgment, or a hopeful trustful heart.” And with a smile ready in her
eyes to quiver down to her lips, she went into the parlour and greeted
Mr. Bell.

“Ah, Missy! you were up late last night, and so you’re late this
morning. Now I’ve got a little piece of news for you. What do you think
of an invitation to dinner? a morning call, literally in the dewy
morning. Why, I’ve had the Vicar here already, on his way to the school.
How much the desire of giving our hostess a teetotal lecture for the
benefit of the hay-makers, had to do with his earliness, I don’t know;
but here he was, when I came down just before nine; and we are asked to
dine there to-day.”

“But Edith expects me back—I cannot go,” said Margaret, thankful to
have so good an excuse.

“Yes! I know; so I told him. I thought you would not want to go. Still
it is open, if you would like it.”

“Oh, no!” said Margaret. “Let us keep to our plan. Let us start at
twelve. It is very good and kind of them; but indeed I could not go.”

“Very well. Don’t fidget yourself, and I’ll arrange it all.”

Before they left, Margaret stole round to the back of the Vicarage
garden, and gathered a little straggling piece of honeysuckle. She would
not take a flower the day before, for fear of being observed, and her
motives and feelings commented upon. But as she returned across the
common, the place was reinvested with the old enchanting atmosphere. The
common sounds of life were more musical there than anywhere else in the
whole world, the light more golden, the life more tranquil and full of
dreamy delight. As Margaret remembered her feelings yesterday, she said
to herself:

“And I too change perpetually—now this, now that—now disappointment
and peevish because all is not exactly as I had pictured it, and now
suddenly discovering that the reality is far more beautiful than I had
imagined it. Oh, Helstone! I shall never love any place like you.”

A few days afterwards, she had found her level, and decided that she was
very glad to have been there, and that she had seen it again, and that
to her it would always be the prettiest spot in the world, but that it
was so full of associations with former days, and especially with her
father and mother, that if it were all to come over again, she should
shrink back from such another visit as that which she had paid with Mr.
Bell.




CHAPTER XLVII.

SOMETHING WANTING.

    “Experience, like a pale musician, holds
    A dulcimer of patience in his hand;
    Whence harmonies we cannot understand,
    Of God’s will in His worlds, the strain unfolds
    In sad, perplexed minors.”
              MRS. BROWNING.


About this time Dixon returned from Milton, and assumed her post as
Margaret’s maid. She brought endless pieces of Milton gossip: How Martha
had gone to live with Miss Thornton, on the latter’s marriage; with an
account of the bridesmaids, dresses and breakfasts, at that interesting
ceremony; how people thought that Mr. Thornton had made too grand a
wedding of it, considering he had lost a deal by the strike, and had had
to pay so much for the failure of his contracts; how little money
articles of furniture—long cherished by Dixon—had fetched at the sale,
which was a shame considering how rich folks were at Milton; how Mrs.
Thornton had come one day and got two or three good bargains, and Mr.
Thornton had come the next, and in his desire to obtain one or two
things, had bid against himself, much to the enjoyment of the
bystanders, so as Dixon observed, that made things even; if Mrs.
Thornton paid too little, Mr. Thornton paid too much. Mr. Bell had sent
all sorts of orders about the books; there was no understanding him, he
was so particular; if he had come himself it would have been all right,
but letters always were and always will be more puzzling than they are
worth. Dixon had not much to tell about the Higginses. Her memory had an
aristocratic bias, and was very treacherous whenever she tried to recall
any circumstance connected with those below her in life. Nicholas was
very well she believed. He had been several times at the house asking
for news of Miss Margaret—the only person who ever did ask, except once
Mr. Thornton. And Mary? oh! of course she was very well, a great, stout,
slatternly thing! She did hear, or perhaps it was only a dream of hers,
though it would be strange if she had dreamt of such people as the
Higginses, that Mary had gone to work at Mr. Thornton’s mill, because
her father wished her to know how to cook; but what nonsense that could
mean she didn’t know. Margaret rather agreed with her that the story was
incoherent enough to be like a dream. Still it was pleasant to have some
one now with whom she could talk of Milton, and Milton people. Dixon was
not over-fond of the subject, rather wishing to leave that part of her
life in shadow. She liked much more to dwell upon speeches of Mr.
Bell’s, which had suggested an idea to her of what was really his
intention—making Margaret his heiress. But her young lady gave her no
encouragement, nor in any way gratified her insinuating enquiries,
however disguised in the form of suspicions or assertions.

All this time Margaret had a strange undefined longing to hear that Mr.
Bell had gone to pay one of his business visits to Milton; for it had
been well understood between them, at the time of their conversation at
Helstone, that the explanation she had desired should only be given to
Mr. Thornton by word of mouth, and even in that manner should be in
nowise forced upon him. Mr. Bell was no great correspondent, but he
wrote from time to time long or short letters, as the humour took him,
and although Margaret was not conscious of any definite hope, on
receiving them, yet she always put away his notes with a little feeling
of disappointment. He was not going to Milton; he said nothing about it
at any rate. Well! she must be patient. Sooner or later the mists would
be cleared away. Mr. Bell’s letters were hardly like his usual self;
they were short, and complaining, with every now and then a little touch
of bitterness that was unusual. He did not look forward to the future;
he rather seemed to regret the past, and be weary of the present.
Margaret fancied that he could not be well; but in answer to some
enquiry of hers as to his health, he sent her a short note, saying there
was an old-fashioned complaint called the spleen; that he was suffering
from that, and it was for her to decide if it was more mental or
physical; but that he should like to indulge himself in grumbling,
without being obliged to send a bulletin every time.

In consequence of this note, Margaret made no more enquiries about his
health. One day Edith let out accidentally a fragment of a conversation
which she had had with Mr. Bell, when he was last in London, which
possessed Margaret with the idea that he had some notion of taking her
to pay a visit to her brother and new sister-in-law, at Cadiz, in the
autumn. She questioned and cross-questioned Edith, till the latter was
weary, and declared that there was nothing more to remember; all he had
said was that he half-thought he should go, and hear for himself what
Frederick had to say about the mutiny; and that it would be a good
opportunity for Margaret to become acquainted with her new
sister-in-law; that he always went somewhere during the long vacation,
and did not see why he should not go to Spain as well as anywhere else.
That was all. Edith hoped Margaret did not want to leave them, that she
was so anxious about all this. And then, having nothing else particular
to do, she cried, and said that she knew she cared much more for
Margaret than Margaret did for her. Margaret comforted her as well as
she could, but she could hardly explain to her how this idea of Spain,
mere Château en Espagne as it might be, charmed and delighted her. Edith
was in the mood to think that any pleasure enjoyed away from her was a
tacit affront, or at best a proof of indifference. So Margaret had to
keep her pleasure to herself, and could only let it escape by the
safety-valve of asking Dixon, when she dressed for dinner, if she would
not like to see Master Frederick and his new wife very much indeed?

“She’s a Papist, Miss, isn’t she?”

“I believe—oh yes, certainly!” said Margaret, a little damped for an
instant at this recollection.

“And they live in a Popish country?”

“Yes.”

“Then I’m afraid I must say, that my soul is dearer to me than even
Master Frederick, his own dear self. I should be in a perpetual terror,
Miss, lest I should be converted.”

“Oh,” said Margaret, “I do not know that I am going; and if I go, I am
not such a fine lady as to be unable to travel without you. No! dear old
Dixon, you shall have a long holiday, if we go. But I’m afraid it is a
long ‘if.’”

Now Dixon did not like this speech. In the first place, she did not like
Margaret’s trick of calling her ‘dear old Dixon’ whenever she was
particularly demonstrative. She knew that Miss Hale was apt to call all
people that she liked “old,” as a sort of term of endearment; but Dixon
always winced away from the application of the word to herself, who,
being not much past fifty, was, she thought, in the very prime of life.
Secondly, she did not like being so easily taken at her word; she had,
with all her terror, a lurking curiosity about Spain, the Inquisition,
and Popish mysteries. So, after clearing her throat, as if to show her
willingness to do away with difficulties, she asked Miss Hale whether
she thought, if she took care never to see a priest, or enter into one
of their churches, there would be so very much danger of her being
converted? Master Frederick, to be sure, had gone over unaccountably.

“I fancy it was love that first predisposed him to conversion,” said
Margaret, sighing.

“Indeed, Miss!” said Dixon; “well! I can preserve myself from priests,
and from churches; but love steals in unawares! I think it’s as well I
should not go.”

Margaret was afraid of letting her mind run too much upon this Spanish
plan. But it took off her thoughts from too impatiently dwelling upon
her desire to have all explained to Mr. Thornton. Mr. Bell appeared for
the present to be stationary at Oxford, and to have no immediate purpose
of going to Milton, and some secret restraint seemed to hang over
Margaret, and prevent her from even asking, or alluding again to any
probability of such a visit on his part. Nor did she feel at liberty to
name what Edith had told her of the idea he had entertained,—it might
be but for five minutes,—of going to Spain. He had never named it at
Helstone, during all that sunny day of leisure; it was very probably but
the fancy of a moment,—but if it were true, what a bright outlet it
would be from the monotony of her present life, which was beginning to
fall upon her.

One of the great pleasures of Margaret’s life at this time was in
Edith’s boy. He was the pride and plaything of both father and mother,
as long as he was good; but he had a strong will of his own, and as soon
as he burst out into one of his stormy passions, Edith would throw
herself back in despair and fatigue, and sigh out, “Oh dear, what shall
I do with him! Do, Margaret, please ring the bell for Hanley.”

But Margaret almost liked him better in these manifestations of
character than in his good blue-sashed moods. She would carry him off
into a room, where they two alone battled it out; she with a firm power
which subdued him into peace, while every sudden charm and wile she
possessed was exerted on the side of right, until he would rub his
little hot and tear-smeared face all over hers, kissing and caressing
till he often fell asleep in her arms or on her shoulder. Those were
Margaret’s sweetest moments. They gave her a taste of the feeling that
she believed would be denied to her for ever.

Mr. Henry Lennox added a new and not disagreeable element to the course
of the household life by his frequent presence. Margaret thought him
colder, if more brilliant than formerly; but there were strong
intellectual tastes, and much and varied knowledge, which gave flavour
to the otherwise rather insipid conversation. Margaret saw glimpses in
him of a slight contempt for his brother and sister-in-law, and for
their mode of life, which he seemed to consider as frivolous and
purposeless. He once or twice spoke to his brother, in Margaret’s
presence, in a pretty sharp tone of enquiry, as to whether he meant
entirely to relinquish his profession; and on Captain Lennox’s reply,
that he had quite enough to live upon, she had seen Mr. Lennox’s curl of
the lip as he said, “And is that all you live for?”

But the brothers were much attached to each other, in the way that any
two persons are, when the one is cleverer and always leads the other,
and this last is patiently content to be led. Mr. Lennox was pushing on
in his profession; cultivating, with profound calculation, all those
connections that might eventually be of service to him; keen-sighted,
far-seeing, intelligent, sarcastic, and proud. Since the one long
conversation relating to Frederick’s affairs, which she had with him the
first evening in Mr. Bell’s presence, she had had no great intercourse
with him, further than that which arose out of their close relations
with the same household. But this was enough to wear off the shyness on
her side, and any symptoms of mortified pride and vanity on his. They
met, continually, of course, but she thought that he rather avoided
being alone with her; she fancied that he, as well as she, perceived
that they had drifted strangely apart from their former anchorage, side
by side, in many of their opinions, and all their tastes.

And yet, when he had spoken unusually well, or with remarkable
epigrammatic point, she felt that his eye sought the expression of her
countenance first of all, if but for an instant; and that, in the
family intercourse which constantly threw them together, her opinion was
the one to which he listened with a deference,—the more complete,
because it was reluctantly paid, and concealed as much as possible.




CHAPTER XLVIII.

“NE’ER TO BE FOUND AGAIN.”

    “My own, my father’s friend!
      I cannot part with thee!
    I ne’er have shown, thou ne’er hast known,
      How dear thou art to me.”
              ANON.


The elements of the dinner-parties which Mrs. Lennox gave, were these;
her friends contributed the beauty, Captain Lennox the easy knowledge of
the subjects of the day; and Mr. Henry Lennox, and the sprinkling of
rising men who were received as his friends, brought the wit, the
cleverness, the keen and extensive knowledge of which they knew well
enough how to avail themselves without seeming pedantic, or burdening
the rapid flow of conversation.

These dinners were delightful; but even here Margaret’s dissatisfaction
found her out. Every talent, every feeling, every acquirement; nay, even
every tendency towards virtue, was used up as materials for fireworks;
the hidden, sacred fire, exhausted itself in sparkle and crackle. They
talked about art in a merely sensuous way, dwelling on outside effects,
instead of allowing themselves to learn what it has to teach. They
lashed themselves up into an enthusiasm about high subjects in company,
and never thought about them when they were alone; they squandered their
capabilities of appreciation into a mere flow of appropriate words. One
day, after the gentlemen had come up into the drawing-room, Mr. Lennox
drew near to Margaret, and addressed her in almost the first voluntary
words he had spoken to her since she had returned to live in Harley
Street.

“You did not look pleased at what Shirley was saying at dinner.”

“Didn’t I? My face must be very expressive,” replied Margaret.

“It always was. It has not lost the trick of being eloquent.”

“I did not like,” said Margaret, hastily, “his way of advocating what he
knew to be wrong—so glaringly wrong—even in jest.”

“But it was very clever. How every word told! Did you remember the happy
epithets?”

“Yes.”

“And despise them, you would like to add. Pray don’t scruple, though he
is my friend.”

“There! that is the exact tone in you, that”—she stopped short.

He listened for a moment to see if she would finish her sentence; but
she only reddened, and turned away; before she did so, however, she
heard him say, in a very low, clear voice,—

“If my tones, or modes of thought, are what you dislike, will you do me
the justice to tell me so, and so give me the chance of learning to
please you.”

All these weeks there was no intelligence of Mr. Bell’s going to Milton.
He had spoken of it at Helstone as of a journey which he might have to
take in a very short time from then; but he must have transacted his
business by writing. Margaret thought, ere now, and she knew that if he
could, he would avoid going to a place which he disliked, and moreover
would little understand the secret importance which she affixed to the
explanation that could only be given by word of mouth. She knew that he
would feel that it was necessary that it should be done; but whether in
summer, autumn, or winter, it would signify very little. It was now
August, and there had been no mention of the Spanish journey to which he
had alluded to Edith, and Margaret tried to reconcile herself to the
fading away of this illusion.

But one morning she received a letter, saying that next week he meant to
come up to town; he wanted to see her about a plan which he had in his
head; and, moreover, he intended to treat himself to a little doctoring,
as he had begun to come round to her opinion, that it would be
pleasanter to think that his health was more in fault than he, when he
found himself irritable and cross. There was altogether a tone of forced
cheerfulness in the letter, as Margaret noticed afterwards; but at the
time her attention was taken up by Edith’s exclamations.

“Coming up to town! Oh dear! and I am so worn out by the heat that I
don’t believe I have strength enough in me for another dinner. Besides,
everybody has left but our dear stupid selves, who can’t settle where to
go to. There would be nobody to meet him.”

“I’m sure he would much rather come and dine with us quite alone than
with the most agreeable strangers you could pick up. Besides, if he is
not well he won’t wish for invitations. I am glad he has owned it at
last. I was sure he was ill from the whole tone of his letters, and yet
he would not answer me when I asked him, and I had no third person to
whom I could apply for news.”

“Oh! he is not very ill, or he would not think of Spain.”

“He never mentions Spain.”

“No! but his plan that is to be proposed evidently relates to that. But
would you really go in such weather as this?”

“Oh, it will get cooler every day. Yes! Think of it. I am only afraid I
have thought and wished too much—in that absorbing wilful way which is
sure to be disappointed—or else gratified, to the letter, while in the
spirit it gives no pleasure.”

“But that’s superstitious, I’m sure, Margaret.”

“No, I don’t think it is. Only it ought to warn me, and check me from
giving way to such passionate wishes. It is a sort of ‘Give me children,
or else I die.’ I’m afraid my cry is, ‘Let me go to Cadiz, or else I
die.’”

“My dear Margaret! You’ll be persuaded to stay there; and then what
shall I do? Oh! I wish I could find somebody for you to marry here, that
I could be sure of you!”

“I shall never marry.”

“Nonsense, and double nonsense! Why, as Sholto says, you’re such an
attraction to the house, that he knows ever so many men who will be glad
to visit here next year for your sake.”

Margaret drew herself up haughtily. “Do you know, Edith, I sometimes
think your Corfu life has taught you——”

“Well!”

“Just a shade or two of coarseness.”

Edith began to sob so bitterly, and to declare so vehemently that
Margaret had lost all love for her, and no longer looked upon her as a
friend, that Margaret came to think that she had expressed too harsh an
opinion for the relief of her own wounded pride, and ended by being
Edith’s slave for the rest of the day; while that little lady, overcome
by wounded feeling, lay like a victim on the sofa, heaving occasionally
a profound sigh, till at last she fell asleep.

Mr. Bell did not make his appearance even on the day to which he had for
a second time deferred his visit. The next morning there came a letter
from Wallis, his servant, stating that his master had not been feeling
well for some time, which had been the true reason of his putting off
his journey; and that at the very time when he should have set out for
London, he had been seized with an apoplectic fit; it was, indeed,
Wallis added, the opinion of the medical men—that he could not survive
the night; and more than probable, that by the time Miss Hale received
this letter his poor master would be no more.

Margaret received this letter at breakfast-time, and turned very pale as
she read it; then, silently putting into Edith’s hands, she left the
room.

Edith was terribly shocked as she read it, and cried in a sobbing,
frightened, childish way, much to her husband’s distress. Mrs. Shaw was
breakfasting in her own room, and upon him devolved the task of
reconciling his wife to the near contact into which she seemed to be
brought with death, for the first time that she could remember in her
life. Here was a man who was to have dined with them to-day lying dead
or dying instead! It was some time before she could think of Margaret.
Then she started up, and followed her upstairs into her room. Dixon was
packing up a few toilette articles, and Margaret was hastily putting on
her bonnet, shedding tears all the time, and her hands trembling so that
she could hardly tie the strings.

“Oh, dear Margaret! how shocking! What are you doing? Are you going
out? Sholto would telegraph or do anything you like.”

“I am going to Oxford. There is a train in half-an-hour. Dixon has
offered to go with me, but I could have gone by myself. I must see him
again. Besides, he may be better, and want some care. He has been like a
father to me. Don’t stop me, Edith.”

“But I must. Mamma won’t like it at all. Come and ask her about it,
Margaret. You don’t know where you’re going. I should not mind if he had
a house of his own; but in his Fellow’s rooms! Come to mamma, and do ask
her before you go. It will not take a minute.”

Margaret yielded, and lost her train. In the suddenness of the event,
Mrs. Shaw became bewildered and hysterical, and so the precious time
slipped by. But there was another train in a couple of hours; and after
various discussions on propriety and impropriety, it was decided that
Captain Lennox should accompany Margaret, as the one thing to which she
was constant was her resolution to go, alone or otherwise, by the next
train, whatever might be said of the propriety or impropriety of the
step. Her father’s friend, her own friend, was lying at the point of
death; and the thought of this came upon her with such vividness, that
she was surprised herself at the firmness with which she asserted
something of her right to independence of action; and five minutes
before the time of starting, she found herself sitting in a railway
carriage opposite to Captain Lennox. It was always a comfort to her to
think that she had gone, though it was only to hear that he had died in
the night. She saw the rooms that he had occupied, and associated them
ever after most fondly in her memory with the idea of her father, and
his one cherished and faithful friend.

They had promised Edith before starting, that if all had ended as they
feared, they would return to dinner; so that long, lingering look around
the room in which her father had died, had to be interrupted, and a
quiet farewell taken of the kind old face that had so often come out
with pleasant words, and merry quips and cranks.

Captain Lennox fell asleep on their journey home; and Margaret could cry
at leisure, and bethink her of this fatal year, and all the woes it had
brought to her. No sooner was she fully aware of one loss than another
came—not to supersede her grief for the one before, but to re-open
wounds and feelings scarcely healed. But at the sound of the tender
voices of her aunt and Edith, of merry little Sholto’s glee at her
arrival, and at the sight of the well-lighted rooms, with their
mistress, pretty in her paleness and her eager sorrowful interest,
Margaret roused herself from her heavy trance of almost superstitious
hopelessness, and began to feel that even around her joy and gladness
might gather. She had Edith’s place on the sofa; Sholto was taught to
carry Aunt Margaret’s cup of tea very carefully to her; and by the time
she went up to dress, she could thank God for having spared her dear old
friend a long or a painful illness.




CHAPTER XLIX.

BREATHING TRANQUILLITY.

    “And down the sunny beach she paces slowly,
    With many doubtful pauses by the way;
    Grief hath an influence so hushed and holy.”
              HOOD.


“Is not Margaret the heiress?” whispered Edith to her husband, as they
were in their room alone at night after the sad journey to Oxford. She
had pulled his tall head down, and stood upon tiptoe, and implored him
not to be shocked, before she ventured to ask this question. Captain
Lennox was, however, quite in the dark; if he had ever heard, he had
forgotten; it could not be much that a Fellow of a small College had to
leave; but he had never wanted her to pay for her board; and two hundred
and fifty pounds a year was something ridiculous, considering that she
did not take wine. Edith came down upon her feet a little bit sadder;
with a romance blown to pieces.

A week afterwards, she came prancing towards her husband, and made him a
low curtsey:

“I am right, and you are wrong, most noble Captain. Margaret has had a
lawyer’s letter, and she is residuary legatee—the legacies being about
two thousand pounds, and the remainder about forty thousand, at the
present value of property in Milton.”

“Indeed! and how does she take her good fortune?”

“Oh, it seems she knew she was to have it all along; only she had no
idea it was so much. She looks very white and pale, and says she’s
afraid of it; but that’s nonsense, you know, and will soon go off. I
left mamma pouring congratulations down her throat, and stole away to
tell you.”

It seemed to be supposed, by general consent, that the most natural
thing was to consider Mr. Lennox henceforward as Margaret’s legal
adviser. She was so entirely ignorant of all forms of business that in
nearly everything she had to refer to him. He chose out her attorney; he
came to her with papers to be signed. He was never so happy as when
teaching her of what all these mysteries of the law were the signs and
types.

“Henry,” said Edith, one day, archly; “do you know what I hope and
expect all these long conversations with Margaret will end in?”

“No, I don’t,” said he, reddening. “And I desire you not to tell me.”

“Oh, very well; then I need not tell Sholto not to ask Mr. Montagu so
often to the house.”

“Just as you choose,” said he with forced coolness. “What you are
thinking of may or may not happen; but this time, before I commit
myself, I will see my ground clear. Ask whom you choose. It may not be
very civil, Edith, but if you meddle in it you will mar it. She has been
very farouche with me for a long time; and is only just beginning to
thaw a little from her Zenobia ways. She has the making of a Cleopatra
in her, if only she were a little more pagan.”

“For my part,” said Edith, a little maliciously, “I am very glad she is
a Christian. I know so very few!”

There was no Spain for Margaret that autumn; although to the last she
hoped that some fortunate occasion would call Frederick to Paris,
whither she could easily have met with a convoy. Instead of Cadiz, she
had to content herself with Cromer. To that place her aunt Shaw and the
Lennoxes were bound. They had all along wished her to accompany them,
and, consequently, with their characters, they made but lazy efforts to
forward her own separate wish. Perhaps Cromer was, in one sense of the
expression, the best for her. She needed bodily strengthening and
bracing as well as rest.

Among other hopes that had vanished, was the hope, the trust she had
had, that Mr. Bell would have given Mr. Thornton the simple facts of the
family circumstances which had preceded the unfortunate accident that
led to Leonards’ death. Whatever opinion—however changed it might be
from what Mr. Thornton had once entertained, she had wished it to be
based upon a true understanding of what she had done, and why she had
done it. It would have been a pleasure to her: would have given her rest
on a point on which she should now all her life be restless, unless she
could resolve not to think upon it. It was now so long after the time of
these occurrences, that there was no possible way of explaining them
save the one which she had lost by Mr. Bell’s death. She might just
submit, like many another, to be misunderstood; but, though reasoning
herself into the belief that in this hers was no uncommon lot, her heart
did not ache the less with longing that some time—years and years
hence—before he died at any rate, he might know how much she had been
tempted. She thought that she did not want to hear that all was
explained to him, if only she could be sure that he would know. But this
wish was vain, like so many others; and when she had schooled herself
into this conviction, she turned with all her heart and strength to the
life that lay immediately before her, and resolved to strive and make
the best of that.

She used to sit long hours upon the beach, gazing intently on the waves
as they chafed with perpetual motion against the pebbly shore,—or she
looked out upon the more distant heave, and sparkle against the sky, and
heard, without being conscious of hearing, the eternal psalm, which went
up continually. She was soothed without knowing how or why. Listlessly
she sat there, on the ground, her hands clasped round her knees, while
her aunt Shaw did small shoppings, and Edith and Captain Lennox rode far
and wide on shore and inland. The nurses, sauntering on with their
charges, would pass and repass her, and wonder in whispers what she
could find to look at so long, day after day. And when the family
gathered at dinner-time, Margaret was so silent and absorbed that Edith
voted her moped, and hailed a proposal of her husband’s with great
satisfaction, that Mr. Henry Lennox should be asked to take Cromer for a
week, on his return from Scotland in October.

But all this time for thought enabled Margaret to put events in their
right places, as to origin and significance, both as regarded her past
life and her future. Those hours by the seaside were not lost, as any
one might have seen who had had the perception to read, or the care to
understand, the look that Margaret’s face was gradually acquiring. Mr.
Henry Lennox was excessively struck by the change.

“The sea has done Miss Hale an immense deal of good, I should fancy,”
said he, when she first left the room after his arrival in their family
circle. “She looks ten years younger than she did in Harley Street.”

“That’s the bonnet I got her!” said Edith, triumphantly. “I knew it
would suit her the moment I saw it.”

“I beg your pardon,” said Mr. Lennox, in the half-contemptuous,
half-indulgent tone he generally used to Edith. “But I believe I know
the difference between the charms of a dress and the charms of a woman.
No mere bonnet would have made Miss Hale’s eyes so lustrous and yet so
soft, or her lips so ripe and red—and her face altogether so full of
peace and light.—She is like, and yet more,”—he dropped his
voice,—“like the Margaret Hale of Helstone.”

From this time the clever and ambitious man bent all his powers to
gaining Margaret. He loved her sweet beauty. He saw the latent sweep of
her mind, which could easily (he thought) be led to embrace all the
objects on which he had set his heart. He looked upon her fortune only
as a part of the complete and superb character of herself and her
position; yet he was fully aware of the rise which it would immediately
enable him, the poor barrister, to take. Eventually he would earn such
success, and such honours, as would enable him to pay her back, with
interest, that first advance in wealth which he should owe to her. He
had been to Milton on business connected with her property, on his
return from Scotland; and with the quick eye of a skilled lawyer, ready
ever to take in and weigh contingencies, he had seen that much
additional value was yearly accruing to the lands and tenements which
she owned in that prosperous and increasing town. He was glad to find
that the present relationship between Margaret and himself, of client
and legal adviser, was gradually superseding the recollection of that
unlucky, mismanaged day at Helstone. He had thus unusual opportunities
of intimate intercourse with her, besides those that arose from the
connection between the families.

Margaret was only too willing to listen as long as he talked of Milton,
though he had seen none of the people whom she more especially knew. It
had been the tone with her aunt and cousin to speak of Milton with
dislike and contempt; just such feelings as Margaret was ashamed to
remember she had expressed and felt on first going to live there. But
Mr. Lennox almost exceeded Margaret in his appreciation of the
character of Milton and its inhabitants. Their energy, their power,
their indomitable courage in struggling and fighting; their lurid
vividness of existence, captivated and arrested his attention. He was
never tired of talking about them; and had never perceived how selfish
and material were too many of the ends they proposed to themselves as
the result of all their mighty, untiring endeavour, till Margaret, even
in the midst of her gratification, had the candour to point this out, as
the tainting sin in so much that was noble and to be admired. Still,
when other subjects palled upon her, and she gave but short answers to
many questions, Henry Lennox found out that an enquiry as to some
Darkshire peculiarity of character called back the light into her eye,
the glow into her cheek.

When they returned to town, Margaret fulfilled one of her sea-side
resolves, and took her life into her own hands. Before they went to
Cromer, she had been as docile to her aunt’s laws as if she were still
the scared little stranger who cried herself to sleep that first night
in the Harley Street nursery. But she had learnt, in those solemn hours
of thought, that she herself must one day answer for her own life, and
what she had done with it; and she tried to settle that most difficult
problem for woman, how much was to be utterly merged in obedience to
authority, and how much might be set apart for freedom in working. Mrs.
Shaw was as good-tempered as could be; and Edith had inherited this
charming domestic quality; Margaret herself had probably the worst
temper of the three, for her quick perceptions and over-lively
imagination made her hasty, and her early isolation from sympathy had
made her proud: but she had an indescribable childlike sweetness of
heart, which made her manners, even in her rarely wilful moods,
irresistible of old; and now, chastened even by what the world called
her good fortune, she charmed her reluctant aunt into acquiescence with
her will. So Margaret gained the acknowledgment of her right to follow
her own ideas of duty.

“Only don’t be strong-minded,” pleaded Edith. “Mamma wants you to have a
footman of your own; and I’m sure you’re very welcome, for they’re great
plagues. Only to please me, darling, don’t go and have a strong mind;
it’s the only thing I ask. Footman or no footman, don’t be
strong-minded.”

“Don’t be afraid, Edith. I’ll faint on your hands at the servants’
dinner-time, the very first opportunity; and then, what with Sholto
playing with the fire, and the baby crying, you’ll begin to wish for a
strong-minded woman, equal to any emergency.”

“And you’ll not grow too good to joke and be merry?”

“Not I. I shall be merrier than I have ever been, now I have got my own
way.”

“And you’ll not go a figure, but let me buy your dresses for you?”

“Indeed I mean to buy them for myself. You shall come with me if you
like; but no one can please me but myself.”

“Oh! I was afraid you’d dress in brown and dust-colour, not to show the
dirt you’ll pick up in all those places. I’m glad you’re going to keep
one or two vanities, just by way of specimens of the old Adam.”

“I am going to be just the same, Edith, if you and my aunt could but
fancy so. Only as I have neither husband nor child to give me natural
duties, I must make myself some, in addition to ordering my gowns.”

In the family conclave, which was made up of Edith, her mother, and her
husband, it was decided that perhaps all these plans of hers would only
secure her the more for Henry Lennox. They kept her out of the way of
other friends who might have been eligible sons or brothers; and it was
also agreed that she never seemed to take much pleasure in the society
of any one but Henry, out of their own family. The other admirers,
attracted by her appearance or the reputation of her fortune, were swept
away, by her unconscious smiling disdain, into the paths frequented by
other beauties less fastidious, or other heiresses with a larger amount
of gold. Henry and she grew slowly into closer intimacy; but neither he
nor she were people to brook the slightest notice of their proceedings.




CHAPTER L

CHANGES AT MILTON.

    “Here we go up, up, up;
    And here we go down, down, downee!”
              NURSERY SONG.


Meanwhile at Milton the chimneys smoked, the ceaseless roar and mighty
beat and dazzling whirr of machinery struggled and strove perpetually.
Senseless and purposeless were wood and iron and steam in their endless
labours; but the persistence of their monotonous work was rivalled in
tireless endurance by the strong crowds, who, with sense and with
purpose, were busy and restless in seeking after—What? In the streets
there were few loiterers,—none walking for mere pleasure; every man’s
face was set in lines of eagerness or anxiety; news was sought for with
fierce avidity; and men jostled each other aside in the Mart and in the
Exchange, as they did in life, in the deep selfishness of competition.
There was gloom over the town. Few came to buy, and those who did were
looked at suspiciously by the sellers; for credit was insecure, and the
most stable might have their fortunes affected by the sweep in the great
neighbouring port among the shipping houses. Hitherto there had been no
failures in Milton; but from the immense speculations that had come to
light in making a bad end in America, and yet nearer home, it was known
that some Milton houses of business must suffer so severely that every
day men’s faces asked, if their tongues did not, “What news? Who is
gone? How will it affect me?” And if two or three spoke together, they
dwelt rather on the names of those who were safe than dared to hint at
those likely, in their opinion, to go: for idle breath may, at such
times, cause the downfall of some who might otherwise weather the storm;
and one going down drags many after. “Thornton is safe,” say they. “His
business is large—extending every year; but such a head as he has, and
so prudent with all his daring!” Then one man draws another aside, and
walks a little apart, and with head inclined into his neighbour’s ear,
he says, “Thornton’s business is large; but he has spent his profits in
extending it; he has no capital laid by; his machinery is new within
these two years, and has cost him—we won’t say what!—a word to the
wise!” But that Mr. Harrison was a croaker,—a man who had succeeded to
his father’s trade-made fortune, which he had feared to lose by altering
his mode of business to any having a larger scope; yet he grudged every
penny made by others more daring and far-sighted.

But the truth was, Mr. Thornton was hard pressed. He felt it acutely in
his vulnerable point—his pride in the commercial character which he had
established for himself. Architect of his own fortunes, he attributed
this to no special merit or qualities of his own, but to the power,
which he believed that commerce gave to every brave, honest, and
persevering man, to raise himself to a level from which he might see and
read the great game of worldly success, and honestly, by such
far-sightedness, command more power and influence than in any other mode
of life. Far away, in the East and in the West, where his person would
never be known, his name was to be regarded, and his wishes to be
fulfilled, and his word pass like gold. That was the idea of
merchant-life with which Mr. Thornton had started. “Her merchants be
like princes,” said his mother, reading the text aloud, as if it were a
trumpet-call to invite her boy to the struggle. He was but like many
others—men, women, and children—alive to distant, and dead to near
things. He sought to possess the influence of a name in foreign
countries and far-away seas,—to become the head of a firm that should
be known for generations; and it had taken him long silent years to come
even to a glimmering of what he might be now, to-day, here in his own
town, his own factory, among his own people. He and they had led
parallel lives—very close, but never touching—till the accident (or so
it seemed) of his acquaintance with Higgins. Once brought face to face,
man to man, with an individual of the masses around him, and (take
notice) out of the character of master and workman, in the first
instance, they had each begun to recognise that “we have all of us one
human heart.” It was the fine point of the wedge; and until now, when
the apprehension of losing his connection with two or three of the
workmen whom he had so lately begun to know as men,—of having a plan or
two, which were experiments lying very close to his heart, roughly
nipped off without trial,—gave a new poignancy to the subtle fear that
came over him from time to time; until now, he had never recognised how
much and how deep was the interest he had grown of late to feel in his
position of manufacturer, simply because it led him into such close
contact, and gave him the opportunity of so much power, among a race of
people strange, shrewd, ignorant; but, above all, full of character and
strong human feeling.

He reviewed his position as a Milton manufacturer. The strike a year and
a half ago,—or more, for it was now untimely wintry weather, in a late
spring,—that strike, when he was young, and he now was old—had
prevented his completing some of the large orders he had then on hand.
He had locked up a good deal of his capital in new and expensive
machinery, and he had also bought cotton largely, for the fulfilment of
these orders, taken under contract. That he had not been able to
complete them, was owing in some degree to the utter want of skill on
the part of the Irish hands whom he had imported; much of their work was
damaged and unfit to be sent forth by a house which prided itself on
turning out nothing but first-rate articles. For many months, the
embarrassment caused by the strike had been an obstacle in Mr.
Thornton’s way; and often, when his eye fell on Higgins, he could have
spoken angrily to him without any present cause, just from feeling how
serious was the injury that had arisen from this affair in which he was
implicated. But when he became conscious of this sudden, quick
resentment, he resolved to curb it. It would not satisfy him to avoid
Higgins; he must convince himself that he was master over his own anger,
by being particularly careful to allow Higgins access to him, whenever
the strict rules of business, or Mr. Thornton’s leisure permitted. And
by-and-bye, he lost all sense of resentment in wonder how it was, or
could be, that two men like himself and Higgins, living by the same
trade, working in their different ways at the same object, could look
upon each other’s position and duties in so strangely different a way.
And thence arose that intercourse, which, though it might not have the
effect of preventing all future clash of opinion and action, when the
occasion arose, would, at any rate, enable both master and man to look
upon each other with far more charity and sympathy, and bear with each
other more patiently and kindly. Besides this improvement of feeling,
both Mr. Thornton and his workmen found out their ignorance as to
positive matters of fact, known heretofore to one side, but not to the
other.

But now had come one of those periods of bad trade, when the market
falling brought down the value of all large stocks; Mr. Thornton’s fell
to nearly half. No orders were coming in; so he lost the interest of the
capital he had locked up in machinery; indeed, it was difficult to get
payment for the orders completed; yet there was the constant drain of
expenses for working the business. Then the bills became due for the
cotton he had purchased; and money being scarce, he could only borrow at
exorbitant interest, and yet he could not realise any of his property.
But he did not despair; he exerted himself day and night to foresee and
to provide for all emergencies; he was as calm and gentle to the women
in his home as ever; to the workmen in his mill he spoke not many words,
but they knew him by this time; and many a curt, decided answer was
received by them rather with sympathy for the care they saw pressing
upon him, than with the suppressed antagonism which had formerly been
smouldering, and ready for hard words and hard judgments on all
occasions. “Th’ measter’s a deal to potter him,” said Higgins, one day,
as he heard Mr. Thornton’s short, sharp inquiry, why such a command had
not been obeyed; and caught the sound of the suppressed sigh which he
heaved in going past the room where some of the men were working.
Higgins and another man stopped over-hours that night, unknown to any
one, to get the neglected piece of work done; and Mr. Thornton never
knew but that the overlooker, to whom he had given the command in the
first instance, had done it himself.

“Eh! I reckon I know who’d ha’ been sorry for to see our measter sitting
so like a piece o’ grey calico! Th’ oud parson would ha’ fretted his
woman’s heart out, if he’d seen the woeful looks I have seen on our
measter’s face,” thought Higgins, one day, as he was approaching Mr.
Thornton in Marlborough Street.

“Measter,” said he, stopping his employer in his quick resolved walk,
and causing that gentleman to look up with a sudden annoyed start, as if
his thoughts had been far away.

“Have yo’ heerd aught of Miss Marget lately?”

“Miss—who?” replied Mr. Thornton.

“Miss Marget—Miss Hale—th’ oud parson’s daughter—yo’ known who I mean
well enough—if yo’ll only think a bit—” (there was nothing
disrespectful in the tone in which this was said).

“Oh yes!” and suddenly the wintry frost-bound look of care had left Mr.
Thornton’s face, as if some soft summer gale had blown all anxiety away
from his mind; and though his mouth was as much compressed as before,
his eyes smiled out benignly on his questioner.

“She’s my landlord now, you know, Higgins. I hear of her through her
agent here, every now and then. She’s well and among friends—thank you,
Higgins.” That “thank you” lingered after the other words, and yet came
with so much warmth of feeling, let in a new light to the acute Higgins.
It might be but a will-o’-th’-wisp, but he thought he would follow it
and ascertain whither it would lead him.

“And she’s not getten married, measter?”

“Not yet.” The face was cloudy once more. “There is some talk of it, as
I understand, with a connection of the family.”

“Then she’ll not be for coming to Milton again, I reckon.”

“No!”

“Stop a minute, measter.” Then going up confidentially close, he said,
“Is th’ young gentleman cleared?” He enforced the depth of his
intelligence by a wink of the eye, which only made things more
mysterious to Mr. Thornton.

“Th’ young gentleman, I mean—Master Frederick, they ca’ed him—her
brother as was over here, yo’ known.”

“Over here.”

“Ay, to be sure, at th’ missus’s death. Yo’ need na be feared of my
telling; for Mary and me, we knowed it all along, only we held our
peace, for we got it through Mary working in th’ house.”

“And he was over. It was her brother.”

“Sure enough, and I reckoned yo’ knowed it, or I’d never ha’ let on. Yo’
knowed she had a brother?”

“Yes, I know all about him. And he was over at Mrs. Hale’s death?”

“Nay! I’m not going for to tell more. I’ve maybe getten them into
mischief already, for they kept it very close. I nobbut wanted to know
if they’d getten him cleared?”

“Not that I know of. I know nothing. I only hear of Miss Hale, now, as
my landlord, and through her lawyer.”

He broke off from Higgins, to follow the business on which he had been
bent when the latter first accosted him; leaving Higgins baffled in his
endeavour.

“It was her brother,” said Mr. Thornton to himself. “I am glad. I may
never see her again; but it is a comfort—a relief—to know that much. I
knew she could not be unmaidenly; and yet I yearned for conviction. Now
I am glad!”

It was a little golden thread running through the dark web of his
present fortunes; which were growing ever gloomier and more gloomy. His
agent had largely trusted a house in the American trade, which went
down, along with several others, just at this time, like a pack of
cards, the fall of one compelling other failures. What were Mr.
Thornton’s engagements? Could he stand?

Night after night he took books and papers into his own private room,
and sate up there long after the family were gone to bed. He thought no
one knew of this occupation of the hours he should have spent in sleep.
One morning, when daylight was stealing in through the crevices of his
shutters, and he had never been in bed, and, in hopeless indifference of
mind, was thinking that he could do without the hour or two of rest,
which was all that he should be able to take before the stir of daily
labour began again, the door of his room opened, and his mother stood
there, dressed as she had been the day before. She had never laid
herself down to slumber any more than he. Their eyes met. Their faces
were cold and rigid, and wan, from long watching.

“Mother! why are you not in bed?”

“Son John,” said she, “do you think I can sleep with an easy mind, while
you keep awake full of care? You have not told me what your trouble is;
but sore trouble you have had these many days past.”

“Trade is bad.”

“And you dread——”

“I dread nothing,” replied he, drawing up his head, and holding it
erect. “I know that no man will suffer by me. That was my anxiety.”

“But how do you stand? Shall you—will it be a failure?” her steady
voice trembling in an unwonted manner.

“Not a failure. I must give up business, but I pay all men. I might
redeem myself—I am sorely tempted—”

“How? Oh, John! keep up your name—try all risks for that. How redeem
it?”

“By a speculation offered to me, but full of risk; but, if successful,
placing me high above water-mark, so that no one need ever know the
strait I am in. Still, if it fails—”

“And if it fails,” said she, advancing, and laying her hand on his arm,
her eyes full of eager light. She held her breath to hear the end of his
speech.

“Honest men are ruined by a rogue,” said he gloomily. “As I stand now,
my creditors’ money is safe—every farthing of it; but I don’t know
where to find my own—it may be all gone, and I penniless at this
moment. Therefore, it is my creditors’ money that I should risk.”

“But if it succeeded, they need never know. Is it so desperate a
speculation? I am sure it is not, or you would never have thought of it.
If it succeeded—”

“I should be a rich man, and my peace of conscience would be gone!”

“Why! You would have injured no one.”

“No; but I should have run the risk of ruining many for my own paltry
aggrandisement. Mother, I have decided! You won’t much grieve over our
leaving this house, shall you, dear mother?”

“No! but to have you other than what you are will break my heart. What
can you do?”

“Be always the same John Thornton in whatever circumstances;
endeavouring to do right, and making great blunders; and then trying to
be brave in setting to afresh. But it is hard, mother. I have worked and
planned. I have discovered new powers in my situation too late—and now
all is over. I am too old to begin again with the same heart. It is
hard, mother.”

He turned away from her, and covered his face with his hands.

“I can’t think,” said she, with gloomy defiance in her tone, “how it
comes about. Here is my boy—good son, just man, tender heart—and he
fails in all he sets his mind upon: he finds a woman to love, and she
cares no more for his affection than if he had been a common man; he
labours, and his labour comes to nought. Other people grow rich, and
hold their paltry names high and dry above shame.”

“Shame never touched me,” said he, in a low tone: but she went on.

“I sometimes have wondered where justice was gone to, and now I don’t
believe there is such a thing in the world—now you are come to this;
you, my own John Thornton, though you and I may be beggars together—my
own dear son!”

She fell upon his neck, and kissed him through her tears.

“Mother!” said he, holding her gently in his arms, “who has sent me my
lot in life, both of good and evil?”

She shook her head. She would have nothing to do with religion just
then.

“Mother,” he went on, seeing that she would not speak. “I, too, have
been rebellious; but I’m striving to be so no longer. Help me, as you
helped me when I was a child. Then you said many good words—when my
father died, and we were sometimes sorely short of comforts—which we
shall never be now; you said brave, noble, trustful words then, mother,
which I have never forgotten, though they may have lain dormant. Speak
to me again in the old way, mother. Do not let us have to think that the
world has too much hardened our hearts. If you would say the old good
words, it would make me feel something of the pious simplicity of my
childhood. I say them to myself, but they would come differently from
you, remembering all the cares and trials you have had to bear.”

“I have had a many,” said she, sobbing, “but none so sore as this. To
see you cast down from your rightful place! I could say it for myself,
John, but not for you. Not for you! God has seen fit to be very hard on
you, very.”

She shook with the sobs that come so convulsively when an old person
weeps. The silence around her struck her at last; and she quieted
herself to listen. No sound. She looked. Her son sate by the table, his
arms thrown half across it, his head bent face downwards.

“Oh, John!” she said, and she lifted his face up. Such a strange, pallid
look of gloom was on it, that for a moment it struck her that this look
was the forerunner of death; but as the rigidity melted out of the
countenance and the natural colour returned, and she saw that he was
himself once again, all worldly mortification sank to nothing before the
consciousness of the great blessing that he himself, by his simple
existence was to her. She thanked God for this, and this alone, with a
fervour that swept away all rebellious feelings from her mind.

He did not speak readily; but he went and opened the shutters, and let
the ruddy light of dawn flood the room. But the wind was in the east;
the weather was piercing cold, as it had been for weeks; there would be
no demand for light summer goods this year. That hope for the revival of
trade must utterly be given up.

It was a great comfort to have had this conversation with his mother;
and to feel sure that, however they might henceforward keep silence on
all these anxieties, they yet understood each other’s feelings, and
were, if not in harmony, at least in discord with each other, in their
way of viewing them. Fanny’s husband was vexed at Thornton’s refusal to
take any share in the speculation which he had offered to him, and
withdrew from any possibility of being supposed able to assist him with
the ready money, which indeed the speculator needed for his own venture.

There was nothing for it at last, but that which Mr. Thornton had
dreaded for many weeks; he had to give up the business in which he had
been so long engaged with so much honour and success; and look out for a
subordinate situation. Marlborough Mills and the adjacent dwelling were
held under a long lease; they must if possible be relet. There was an
immediate choice of situations offered to Mr. Thornton. Mr. Hamper would
have been only too glad to have secured him as a steady and experienced
partner for his son, whom he was setting up with a large capital in a
neighbouring town; but the young man was half-educated as regarded
information, and wholly uneducated as regarded any other responsibility
than that of getting money, and brutalised both as to his pleasures and
his pains. Mr. Thornton declined having any share in a partnership,
which would frustrate what few plans he had that survived the wreck of
his fortunes. He would sooner consent to be only a manager, where he
could have a certain degree of power beyond the mere money-getting part,
than have to fall in with the tyrannical humours of a moneyed partner
with whom he felt sure that he should quarrel in a few months.

So he waited, and stood on one side with profound humility, as the news
swept through the Exchange of the enormous fortune which his
brother-in-law had made by his daring speculation. It was a nine days’
wonder. Success brought with it its worldly consequence of extreme
admiration. No one was considered so wise and far-seeing as Mr. Watson.




CHAPTER LI.

MEETING AGAIN.

    “Bear up, brave heart! we will be calm and strong;
    Sure, we can master eyes, or cheek, or tongue,
    Nor let the smallest tell-tale sign appear
    She ever was, and is, and will be dear.”
              RHYMING PLAY.


It was a hot summer’s evening. Edith came into Margaret’s bed-room, the
first time in her habit, the second ready dressed for dinner. No one was
there at first; the next time Edith found Dixon laying out Margaret’s
dress on the bed; but no Margaret. Edith remained to fidget about.

“Oh, Dixon! not those horrid blue flowers to that dead gold-coloured
gown. What taste! Wait a minute, and I will bring you some pomegranate
blossoms.”

“It’s not a dead gold-colour ma’am. It’s a straw-colour. And blue always
goes with straw-colour.” But Edith had brought the brilliant scarlet
flowers before Dixon had got half through her remonstrance.

“Where is Miss Hale?” asked Edith, as soon as she had tried the effect
of the garniture. “I can’t think,” she went on, pettishly, “how my aunt
allowed her to get into such rambling habits in Milton! I’m sure I’m
always expecting to hear of her having met with something horrible among
all those wretched places she pokes herself into. I should never dare to
go down some of those streets without a servant. They’re not fit for
ladies.”

Dixon was still huffed about her despised taste; so she replied rather
shortly:

“It’s no wonder to my mind, when I hear ladies talk such a deal about
ladies—and when they’re such fearful, delicate, dainty ladies too—I
say it’s no wonder to me that there are no longer any saints on
earth——”

“Oh, Margaret! here you are! I have been so wanting you. But how your
cheeks are flushed with the heat, poor child! But only think what that
tiresome Henry has done; really, he exceeds brother-in-law’s limits.
Just when my party was made up so beautifully—fitted in so precisely
for Mr. Colthurst—there has Henry come, with an apology it is true, and
making use of your name for an excuse, and asked me if he may bring that
Mr. Thornton of Milton—your tenant, you know—who is in London about
some law business. It will spoil my number, quite.”

“I don’t mind dinner. I don’t want any,” said Margaret, in a low voice.
“Dixon can get me a cup of tea here, and I will be in the drawing-room
by the time you come up. I shall really be glad to lie down.”

“No, no! that will never do. You do look wretchedly white, to be sure;
but that is just the heat, and we can’t do without you possibly. (Those
flowers a little lower, Dixon. They look glorious flames, Margaret, in
your black hair.) You know we planned you to talk about Milton to Mr.
Colthurst. Oh! to be sure! and this man comes from Milton. I believe it
will be capital, after all. Mr. Colthurst can pump him well on all the
subjects in which he is interested, and it will be great fun to trace
out your experiences, and this Mr. Thornton’s wisdom, in Mr. Colthurst’s
next speech in the House. Really, I think it is a happy hit of Henry’s.
I asked him if he was a man one would be ashamed of; and he replied,
‘Not if you’ve any sense in you, my little sister.’ So I suppose he is
able to sound his h’s, which is not a common Darkshire
accomplishment—eh, Margaret?”

“Mr. Lennox did not say why Mr. Thornton was come up to town? Was it law
business connected with the property?” asked Margaret, in a constrained
voice.

“Oh! he’s failed, or something of the kind, that Henry told you of that
day you had such a headache—what was it? (There, that’s capital, Dixon.
Miss Hale does us credit, does she not?) I wish I was as tall as a
queen, and as brown as a gipsy, Margaret.”

“But about Mr. Thornton?”

“Oh! I really have such a terrible head for law business. Henry will
like nothing better than to tell you all about it. I know the impression
he made upon me was, that Mr. Thornton is very badly off, and a very
respectable man, and that I’m to be very civil to him: and as I did not
know how, I came to you to ask you to help me. And now come down with
me, and rest on the sofa for a quarter of an hour.”

The privileged brother-in-law came early; and Margaret, reddening as she
spoke, began to ask him the questions she wanted to hear answered about
Mr. Thornton.

“He came up about this sub-letting the property—Marlborough Mills, and
the house and premises adjoining, I mean. He is unable to keep it on;
and there are deeds and leases to be looked over and agreements to be
drawn up. I hope Edith will receive him properly; but she was rather put
out, as I could see, by the liberty I had taken in begging for an
invitation for him. But I thought you would like to have some attention
shown him: and one would be particularly scrupulous in paying every
respect to a man who is going down in the world.” He had dropped his
voice to speak to Margaret, by whom he was sitting; but as he ended he
sprang up, and introduced Mr. Thornton, who had that moment entered, to
Edith and Captain Lennox.

Margaret looked with an anxious eye at Mr. Thornton while he was thus
occupied. It was considerably more than a year since she had seen him;
and events had occurred to change him much in that time. His fine figure
yet bore him above the common height of men; and gave him a
distinguished appearance, from the ease of motion which arose out of it,
and was natural to him; but his face looked older and careworn; yet a
noble composure sate upon it, which impressed those who had just been
hearing of his changed position, with a sense of inherent dignity and
manly strength. He was aware, from the first glance he had given round
the room, that Margaret was there; he had seen her intent look of
occupation as she listened to Mr. Henry Lennox; and he came up to her
with the perfectly regulated manner of an old friend. With his first
calm words a vivid colour flashed into her cheeks, which never left them
again during the evening. She did not seem to have much to say to him.
She disappointed him by the quiet way in which she asked what seemed to
him to be the merely necessary questions respecting her old
acquaintances, in Milton; but others came in—more intimate in the house
than he—and he fell into the background, where he and Mr. Lennox talked
together from time to time.

“You think Miss Hale looking well,” said Mr. Lennox, “don’t you? Milton
didn’t agree with her, I imagine; for when she first came to London, I
thought I had never seen any one so much changed. To-night she is
looking radiant. But she is much stronger. Last autumn she was fatigued
with a walk of a couple of miles. On Friday evening we walked up to
Hampstead and back. Yet on Saturday she looked as well as she does now.”

“We!” Who? They two alone?

Mr. Colthurst was a very clever man, and a rising member of Parliament.
He had a quick eye at discerning character, and was struck by a remark
which Mr. Thornton made at dinner-time. He enquired from Edith who that
gentleman was; and, rather to her surprise, she found, from the tone of
his “Indeed!” that Mr. Thornton of Milton was not such an unknown name
to him as she had imagined it would be. Her dinner was going off well.
Henry was in good humour, and brought out his dry caustic wit admirably.
Mr. Thornton and Mr. Colthurst found one or two mutual subjects of
interest, which they could only touch upon then, reserving them for
more private after-dinner talk. Margaret looked beautiful in the
pomegranate flowers; and if she did lean back in her chair and speak but
little, Edith was not annoyed, for the conversation flowed on smoothly
without her. Margaret was watching Mr. Thornton’s face. He never looked
at her: so she might study him unobserved, and note the changes which
even this short time had wrought in him. Only at some unexpected mot of
Mr. Lennox’s, his face flashed out into the old look of intense
enjoyment: the merry brightness returned to his eyes, the lips just
parted to suggest the brilliant smile of former days; and for an
instant, his glance instinctively sought hers, as if he wanted her
sympathy. But when their eyes met, his whole countenance changed; he was
grave and anxious once more; and he resolutely avoided even looking near
her again during dinner.

There were only two ladies beside their own party, and as these were
occupied in conversation by her aunt and Edith, when they went up into
the drawing-room, Margaret languidly employed herself about some work.
Presently the gentlemen came up, Mr. Colthurst and Mr. Thornton in close
conversation. Mr. Lennox drew near to Margaret, and said in a low voice:

“I really think Edith owes me thanks for my contribution to her party.
You’ve no idea what an agreeable, sensible fellow this tenant of yours
is. He has been the very man to give Colthurst all the facts he wanted
coaching in. I can’t conceive how he contrived to mismanage his
affairs.”

“With his powers and opportunities you would have succeeded,” said
Margaret. He did not quite relish the tone in which she spoke, although
the words but expressed a thought which had passed through his own mind.
As he was silent, they caught a swell in the sound of conversation going
on near the fire-place between Mr. Colthurst and Mr. Thornton.

“I assure you, I heard it spoken of with great interest—curiosity as to
its result, perhaps I should rather say. I heard your name frequently
mentioned during my short stay in the neighbourhood.” Then they lost
some words; and when next they could hear Mr. Thornton was speaking.

“I have not the elements for popularity—if they spoke of me in that
way, they were mistaken. I fall slowly into new projects; and I find it
difficult to let myself be known, even by those whom I desire to know,
and with whom I would fain have no reserve. Yet, even with all these
drawbacks, I felt that I was on the right path, and that, starting from
a kind of friendship with one, I was becoming acquainted with many. The
advantages were mutual: we were both unconsciously and consciously
teaching each other.”

“You say ‘were.’ I trust you are intending to pursue the same course?”

“I must stop Colthurst,” said Henry Lennox, hastily. And by an abrupt,
yet apropos question, he turned the current of the conversation, so as
not to give Mr. Thornton the mortification of acknowledging his want of
success and consequent change of position. But as soon as the
newly-started subject had come to a close, Mr. Thornton resumed the
conversation just where it had been interrupted, and gave Mr. Colthurst
the reply to his inquiry.

“I have been unsuccessful in business, and have had to give up my
position as a master. I am on the look-out for a situation in Milton,
where I may meet with employment under some one who will be willing to
let me go along my own way in such matters as these. I can depend upon
myself for having no go-ahead theories that I would rashly bring into
practice. My only wish is to have the opportunity of cultivating some
intercourse with the hands beyond the mere ‘cash nexus.’ But it might be
the point Archimedes sought from which to move the earth, to judge by
the importance attached to it by some of our manufacturers, who shake
their heads and look grave as soon as I name the one or two experiments
that I should like to try.”

“You call them ‘experiments’ I notice,” said Mr. Colthurst, with a
delicate increase of respect in his manner.

“Because I believe them to be such. I am not sure of the consequences
that may result from them. But I am sure they ought to be tried. I have
arrived at the conviction that no mere institutions, however wise, and
however much thought may have been required to organise and arrange
them, can attach class to class as they should be attached, unless the
working out of such institutions bring the individuals of the different
classes into actual personal contact. Such intercourse is the very
breath of life. A working man can hardly be made to feel and know how
much his employer may have laboured in his study at plans for the
benefit of his workpeople. A complete plan emerges like a piece of
machinery, apparently fitted for every emergency. But the hands accept
it as they do machinery, without understanding the intense mental labour
and forethought required to bring it to such perfection. But I would
take an idea, the working out of which would necessitate personal
intercourse; it might not go well at first, but at every hitch interest
would be felt by an increasing number of men, and at last its success in
working come to be desired by all, as all had borne a part in the
formation of the plan; and even then I am sure that it would lose its
vitality, cease to be living, as soon as it was no longer carried on by
that sort of common interest which invariably makes people find means
and ways of seeing each other, and becoming acquainted with each others’
characters and persons, and even tricks of temper and modes of speech.
We should understand each other better, and I’ll venture to say we
should like each other more.”

“And you think they may prevent recurrence of strikes?”

“Not at all. My utmost expectation only goes as far as this—that they
may render strikes not the bitter, venomous sources of hatred they have
hitherto been. A more hopeful man might imagine that a closer and more
genial intercourse between classes might do away with strikes. But I am
not a hopeful man.”

Suddenly, as if a new idea had struck him, he crossed over to where
Margaret was sitting, and began, without preface, as if he knew she had
been listening to all that had passed:

“Miss Hale, I had a round-robin from some of my men—I suspect in
Higgins’ handwriting—stating their wish to work for me, if ever I was
in a position to employ men again on my own behalf. That was good,
wasn’t it?”

“Yes. Just right. I am glad of it,” said Margaret, looking up straight
into his face with her speaking eyes, and then dropping them under his
eloquent glance. He gazed back at her for a minute, as if he did not
know exactly what he was about. Then sighed; and saying, “I knew you
would like it,” he turned away, and never spoke to her again until he
bid her a formal “good night.”

As Mr. Lennox took his departure, Margaret said, with a blush that she
could not repress, and with some hesitation,

“Can I speak to you to-morrow? I want your help about—something.”

“Certainly. I will come at whatever time you name. You cannot give me a
greater pleasure than by making me of any use. At eleven? Very well.”

His eye brightened with exultation. How she was learning to depend upon
him! It seemed as if any day now might give him the certainty, without
having which he had determined never to offer to her again.




CHAPTER LII.

“PACK CLOUDS AWAY.”

    “For joy or grief, for hope or fear,
    For all hereafter, as for here,
    In peace or strife, in storm or shine.”
              ANON.


Edith went about on tip-toe, and checked Sholto in all loud speaking
that next morning, as if any sudden noise would interrupt the conference
that was taking place in the drawing-room. Two o’clock came; and they
still sate there with closed doors. Then there was a man’s footstep
running down stairs; and Edith peeped out of the drawing-room.

“Well, Henry?” said she, with a look of interrogation.

“Well!” said he, rather shortly.

“Come in to lunch!”

“No, thank you, I can’t. I’ve lost too much time here already.”

“Then it’s not all settled?” said Edith, despondingly.

“No! not at all. It never will be settled, if the ‘it’ is what I
conjecture you mean. That will never be, Edith, so give up thinking
about it.”

“But it would be so nice for us all,” pleaded Edith. “I should always
feel comfortable about the children, if I had Margaret settled down near
to me. As it is, I am always afraid of her going off to Cadiz.”

“I will try, when I marry, to look out for a young lady who has a
knowledge of the management of children. That is all I can do. Miss Hale
will not have me. And I shall not ask her.”

“Then what have you been talking about?”

“A thousand things you would not understand: Investments, and leases,
and value of land.”

“Oh, go away if that’s all. You and she will be unbearably stupid, if
you’ve been talking all this time about such weary things.”

“Very well. I’m coming again to-morrow, and bringing Mr. Thornton with
me, to have some more talk with Miss Hale.”

“Mr. Thornton! What has he to do with it?”

“He is Miss Hale’s tenant,” said Mr. Lennox, turning away. “And he
wishes to give up his lease.”

“Oh! very well. I can’t understand details, so don’t give them me.”

“The only detail I want you to understand is, to let us have the back
drawing-room undisturbed, as it was to-day. In general, the children and
servants are so in and out, that I can never get any business
satisfactorily explained; and the arrangements we have to make to-morrow
are of importance.”

No one ever knew why Mr. Lennox did not keep to his appointment on the
following day. Mr. Thornton came true to his time; and after keeping him
waiting for nearly an hour, Margaret came in looking very white and
anxious.

She began hurriedly:

“I am so sorry Mr. Lennox is not here,—he could have done it so much
better than I can. He is my adviser in this”——

“I am sorry that I came, if it troubles you. Shall I go to Mr. Lennox’s
chambers and try and find him?”

“No, thank you. I wanted to tell you, how grieved I was to find that I
am to lose you as a tenant. But, Mr. Lennox says, things are sure to
brighten”——

“Mr. Lennox knows little about it,” said Mr. Thornton quietly. “Happy
and fortunate in all a man cares for, he does not understand what it is
to find oneself no longer young—yet thrown back to the starting-point
which requires the hopeful energy of youth—to feel one half of life
gone, and nothing done—nothing remaining of wasted opportunity, but the
bitter recollection that it has been. Miss Hale, I would rather not hear
Mr. Lennox’s opinion of my affairs. Those who are happy and successful
themselves are too apt to make light of the misfortunes of others.”

“You are unjust,” said Margaret, gently. “Mr. Lennox has only spoken of
the great probability which he believes there to be of your
redeeming—your more than redeeming what you have lost—don’t speak till
I have ended—pray don’t.” And collecting herself once more, she went on
rapidly turning over some law papers, and statement of accounts in a
trembling hurried manner. “Oh! here it is! and—he drew me out a
proposal—I wish he was here to explain it—showing that if you would
take some money of mine, eighteen hundred and fifty-seven pounds, lying
just at this moment unused in the bank, and bringing me in only two and
a half per cent.—you could pay me much better interest, and might go on
working Marlborough Mills.” Her voice had cleared itself and become more
steady. Mr. Thornton did not speak, and she went on looking for some
paper on which were written down the proposals for security; for she was
most anxious to have it all looked upon in the light of a mere business
arrangement, in which the principal advantage would be on her side.
While she sought for this paper, her very heart-pulse was arrested by
the tone in which Mr. Thornton spoke. His voice was hoarse, and
trembling with tender passion, as he said:—

“Margaret!”

For an instant she looked up; and then sought to veil her luminous eyes
by dropping her forehead on her hands. Again, stepping nearer, he
besought her with another tremulous eager call upon her name.

“Margaret!”

Still lower went the head; more closely hidden was the face, almost
resting on the table before her. He came close to her. He knelt by her
side, to bring his face to a level with her ear; and whispered—panted
out the words:—

“Take care.—If you do not speak—I shall claim you as my own in some
strange presumptuous way.—Send me away at once, if I must
go;—Margaret!—”

At that third call she turned her face, still covered with her small
white hands, towards him, and laid it on his shoulder, even hiding it
there; and it was too delicious to feel her soft cheek against his, for
him to wish to see either deep blushes or loving eyes. He clasped her
close. But they both kept silence. At length she murmured in a broken
voice:

“Oh, Mr. Thornton, I am not good enough!”

“Not good enough! Don’t mock my own deep feeling of unworthiness.”

After a minute or two he gently disengaged her hands from her face, and
laid her arms as they had once before been placed to protect him from
the rioters.

“Do you remember, love?” he murmured. “And how I requited you with my
insolence the next day?”

“I remember how wrongly I spoke to you,—that is all.”

“Look here! Lift up your head. I have something to show you!” She slowly
faced him, glowing with beautiful shame.

“Do you know these roses?” he said, drawing out his pocket-book, in
which were treasured up some dead flowers.

“No!” she replied, with innocent curiosity. “Did I give them to you?”

“No! Vanity; you did not. You may have worn sister roses very
probably.”

She looked at them, wondering for a minute, then she smiled a little as
she said—

“They are from Helstone, are they not? I know the deep indentations
round the leaves. Oh! have you been there? When were you there?”

“I wanted to see the place where Margaret grew to what she is, even at
the worst time of all, when I had no hope of ever calling her mine. I
went there on my return from Havre.”

“You must give them to me,” she said, trying to take them out of his
hand with gentle violence.

“Very well. Only you must pay me for them!”

“How shall I ever tell Aunt Shaw?” she whispered, after some time of
delicious silence.

“Let me speak to her.”

“Oh, no! I owe to her,—but what will she say?”

“I can guess. Her first exclamation will be, ‘That man!’”

“Hush!” said Margaret, “or I shall try and show you your mother’s
indignant tones as she says, ‘That woman!’”


